---
title: Sa 08
author: 188 - 229
category: dhamma
contribution: translation
sutta_theme:
  - 6 senses
---

# On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of Saṃyukta-āgama Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8)

Bhikkhu Anālayo

Research Fellow
Dharma Drum Institute of Liberal Arts


法鼓佛學學報第 18 期 頁 1-61（民國 105 年），新北市：法鼓文理學院
Dharma Drum Journal of Buddhist Studies, no. 18 pp. 1-61 (2016)
New Taipei City: Dharma Drum Institute of Liberal Arts
ISSN: 1996-8000


# Abstract

This article translates the eigth fascicle of the _Saṃyukta-āgama_, which
contains discourses 188 to 229. [1]

# Contents


CONNECTED DISCOURSES ON THE SIX SENSE-SPHERES


188. Discourse on Freedom from Delight and Lust


189. Discourse on Right Attention


190. First Discourse on the Eye


191. Second Discourse on the Eye


192. First Discourse on not Being Free from Desire


193. Second Discourse on not Being Free from Desire


194. Discourse on Giving Rise to Delight


195. First Discourse on Impermanence


196. Second Discourse on Impermanence


197. Discourse on Being on Fire


       - Date of submission: 2015/12/31; date of review: 2016/04/18.
I am indebted to Mike Running, Shi Syinchen, and Ken Su for their collaboration and
to the journal’s proof readers for helpful suggestions.

1 The translated text is found at T II 49b7 to 56a17, which is the eighth fascicle in the
Taishō edition corresponding to the eighth fascicle in the reconstructed order of this
collection. In what follows, my identification of Pāli parallels is based on Akanuma
1929/1990 and Yìnshùn 1983, in the case of Sanskrit fragment parallels I am indebted to
Chung 2008. Here and elsewhere, I adopt Pāli for proper names and doctrinal terms
in order to facilitate comparison with the Pāli parallels, except for terms like Dharma
and Nirvāṇa, without thereby intending to take a position on the original language of
the _Saṃyukta-āgama_ manuscript used for translation. My provision of titles is mostly
based on Akanuma 1929/1990; in the case of the same title being repeated I add “first”,
“second”, etc.


2 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


198. First Discourse to Rāhula


199. Second Discourse to Rāhula


200. Third Discourse to Rāhula


201. Discourse to a Monk


202. Discourse on Abandoning the View of Self


203. Discourse on Being Able to Abandon One Thing


204. Discourse on Understanding and Seeing as it Really Is


205. Discourse on the _Udāna_


206. First Discourse at Jīvaka’s Mango Grove


207. Second Discourse at Jīvaka’s Mango Grove


208. Discourse on the Eye in the Present


209. Discourse on the Six Spheres of Contact


210. Discourse on Extensive Joy and Extensive Suffering


211. Discourse on the Five Sense Pleasures


212. Discourse on Cultivating Diligence


213. First Discourse on Two Things


214. Second Discourse on Two Things


215. Discourse to Puṇṇa


216. First Discourse on the Great Ocean


217. Second Discourse on the Great Ocean


218. Discourse on the Path


219. First Discourse on the Path to Nirvāṇa


220. Second Discourse on the Path to Nirvāṇa


221. Discourse on Clinging


222. First Discourse on Understanding


223. Second Discourse on Understanding


224. First Discourse on Abandoning


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 3


225. Second Discourse on Abandoning


226. First Discourse on Conceiving


227. Second Discourse on Conceiving


228. Discourse on What Increases


229. Discourse on What is With Influxes and Without Influxes

# Keywords


Saṃyukta-āgama; Sense-spheres


4 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


# 188. [Discourse on Freedom from Delight and Lust] [2]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “You should rightly
examine the eye as impermanent. One who examines it like this is
called ‘with right view’. Because of rightly contemplating it, disenchantment arises. Because of the arising of disenchantment, one is free
from delight and free from lust. [3] Because of being free from delight
and lust, I say the mind is rightly liberated.


“In the same way [one should rightly examine] the ear … the nose …
the tongue … the body … the mind … [ _up to_ ] … one is free from
delight and free from lust. Monks, because of being free from delight
and lust, I say the mind is rightly liberated.


“One whose mind is rightly liberated is able to declare of himself:
‘Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has been established,
what had to be done has been done, I myself know that there will be
no receiving of any further existence.’” [4]


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


_As for_ being impermanent, _in the same way also [discourses] are to be_
_recited in this way_ _for_ being _dukkha_, empty, and not-self.


2 Parallel: [[SN35.155]] at SN IV 142,1. Akanuma 1929/1990: 38 also lists [[SN35.156]] [[SN35.179–181]] and [[SN35.185]] [[SN35.156]] differs from [[SN35.155]] in that it takes up the
objects of the senses instead of the senses themselves. Of these two discourses, [[SN35.155]] is therefore the closer parallel to [[SA188]] [[SN35.179–181]] and [[SN35.185]] are
on the true nature of the sense in past, present, and future times and thus do not seem
to be parallels.

3 [[SN35.155]] at SN IV 142,3 presents the destruction of delight and the destruction of
lust as mutually supportive.

4 This declaration is not found in [[SN35.155]] which concludes its description with the
indication that the mind is well liberated.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 5


# 189. [Discourse on Right Attention] [5]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “You should give
right attention to the eye and examine it as impermanent. Why is that?
Because of giving right attention to the eye and examining it as impermanent, desire and lust for the eye are abandoned. [Of one who] has
abandoned desire and lust, I say, the mind is rightly liberated.


“Because of giving right attention to the ear … the nose … the tongue …
the body … the mind and examining it [as impermanent], desire and
lust [for it] are abandoned. [6] Of one who has abandoned desire and
lust, I say, the mind is rightly liberated.


“Monks, one whose mind is rightly liberated in this way is able to declare of himself: ‘Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has
been established, what had to be done has been done, I myself know
that there will be no receiving of any further existence.’” [7]


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 190. [First Discourse on the Eye] [8]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


5 Parallel: [[SN35.157]] at SN IV 142,21.

6 [[SN35.157]] at SN IV 142,25 presents the destruction of delight and the destruction of
lust as mutually supportive.

7 Such a declaration is not found in [[SN35.157]] which concludes its description with the
indication that the mind is well liberated.

8 Parallel: [[SN35.27]] at SN IV 18,25; cf. also [[SN35.26]] at SN IV 17,8.


6 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “If one does not discern and does not understand the eye, does not abandon and does not
become free from desire for it, one is not capable of rightly eradicating _dukkha_ . [9]


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like this._


“Monks, one who discerns and understands the eye, [49c] and who abandons and becomes free from desire for it, is capable of rightly eradicating _dukkha_ . One who knows and understands the ear … the nose …
the tongue … the body … the mind, and who abandons and becomes
free from desire for it, is capable of rightly eradicating _dukkha_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 191. [Second Discourse on the Eye] [10]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


9 [[SN35.27]] at SN IV 18,25 precedes the analysis of each sense-sphere with a general
statement that one is incapable of eradicating _dukkha_ without understanding (etc.)
“all”; the same holds for [[SN35.26]] at SN IV 17,8. [[SN35.27]] continues after each of
the senses by mentioning the corresponding object, consciousness, and things to be
cognized by consciousness. In [[SN35.26]] this type of treatment covers the corresponding object, consciousness, contact, and the three feelings. Due to the additional length
of this treatment, [[SN35.27]] seems the closer parallel to [[SA190]] Regarding this treatment in [[SN35.27]] at SN IV 18,30, it is noteworthy that it also includes things to be
cognized by the respective sense-consciousness, such as, in the case of the eye, _cak_  _khuviññāṇaviññātabbā dhammā_ . Since the same exposition earlier already mentioned
_rūpā_, such a reference is redundant. The commentary, Spk II 359,10 (translated Bodhi
2000: 1400 note 12) reflects awareness of this redundancy, leading to proposing explanations which, as already noted by Bodhi, seem rather “contrived”. In the light of
[[SA190]] it seems probable that the tendency to expand such expositions, by adding
ever more aspects of the experience of each sense, resulted in this redundancy, whereby
in the case of each sense the respective sense objects and the things to be cognized by
the respective consciousness are mentioned separately, even though they refer to the
same.

10 The parallel is the same [[SN35.27]] as in the case of the preceding discourse [[SA190]]


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 7


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “One who does not
discern and does not understand the eye, does not abandon and does
not become free from desire for it, is not capable of going beyond the
_dukkha_ of birth, old age, disease, and death. One who does not discern
and does not understand the ear … the nose … the tongue … the
body … the mind, does not abandon and does not become free from
desire for it, is not capable of going beyond the _dukkha_ of birth, old
age, disease, and death.

“Monks, one who discerns and understands the eye, [11] who abandons
and becomes free from desire for it, is capable of going beyond the
_dukkha_ of birth, old age, disease, and death. One who discerns and understands the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind,
who abandons and becomes free from desire for it, is capable of going
beyond the _dukkha_ of birth, old age, disease, and death.”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 192. [First Discourse on not Being Free from De- sire] [12]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “If one is not free
from desire for the eye, one’s mind is not liberated and one is not
capable of rightly eradicating _dukkha_ . [If] one is not free from desire
for the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind, one’s
mind is not liberated and one is not capable of rightly eradicating
_dukkha_ .


11 The rendering follows the suggestion by Yìnshùn 1983: 217 note 4 to emend 色 to
become 眼.

12 Regarding parallels, Akanuma 1929/1990: 38 mentions [[SN35.21–22]] but both discourses seem too different from [[SA192]] to be reckoned parallels.


8 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


“Monks, if one is free from desire for the eye, [13] one’s mind is liberated and one is capable of rightly eradicating _dukkha_ . [If] one is free
from desire for the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the
mind, one’s mind is liberated and one is capable of rightly eradicating
_dukkha_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 193. [Second Discourse on not Being Free from Desire] [14]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “If one is not free
from desire for the eye, [15] one’s mind is not liberated and one is not
capable of going beyond the _dukkha_ of birth, old age, disease, and
death. [If] one is not free from desire for the ear … the nose … the
tongue … the body … the mind, one’s mind is not liberated and one is
not capable of going beyond the _dukkha_ of birth, old age, disease, and
death.”


“Monks, if one is free from desire for the eye, one’s mind is liberated
and one is capable of going beyond the _dukkha_ of birth, old age, disease, and death. [If] one is free from desire for the ear … the nose …
the tongue … the body … the mind, one’s mind is liberated and one is
capable of going beyond the _dukkha_ of birth, old age, disease, and
death.”


13 Adopting a variant reading without an additional reference to 色.

14 Regarding parallels the same applies as in the case of the preceding discourse [[SA192]]

15 The translation is based on an emendation by deleting an additional reference to 色,
here and below for the positive case of being free from desire. This seems to be the
same error as in the previous discourse (cf. above note 13), given that for the other
senses the respective objects are not mentioned.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 9


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully. [50a]

# 194. [Discourse on Giving Rise to Delight] [16]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “If one gives rise to
delight in relation to the eye, then one gives rise to delight in relation
to what is _dukkha_ . If one gives rise to delight in relation to _dukkha_, I
say, one is not liberated from _dukkha_ . [If] one gives rise to delight in
relation to the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind,
then one gives rise to delight in relation to _dukkha_ . [If] one gives rise
to delight in relation to what is _dukkha_, I say, one is not liberated from
_dukkha_ .


“Monks, if one does not give rise to delight in relation to the eye, then
one does not give rise to delight in relation to what is _dukkha_ . One who
does not give rise to delight in relation to _dukkha_, I say, is liberated
from _dukkha_ . [If] one does not give rise to delight in relation to the
ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind, then one does
not give rise to delight in relation to what is _dukkha_ . One who does
not give rise to delight in relation to _dukkha_, I say, is liberated from
_dukkha_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


16 Parallel: [[SN35.19]] at SN IV 13,11. Akanuma 1929/1990: 38 also lists [[SN35.20]] which
differs from [[SN35.19]] in that it takes up the objects of the senses instead of the
senses themselves. Of these two discourses, [[SN35.19]] is the closer parallel to [[SA194]]


10 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


# 195. [First Discourse on Impermanence] [17]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “All is impermanent.
What is all that is impermanent? That is, the eye is impermanent, forms,
eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on
eye-contact, be it painful feeling, pleasant feeling, or neutral feeling,
that is also impermanent.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like this._


“A learned noble disciple who contemplates like this gives rise to disenchantment for the eye, and gives rise to disenchantment for forms,
eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on
eye-contact, be it painful feeling, pleasant feeling, or neutral feeling.


“He gives also rise to disenchantment for the ear … the nose … the
tongue … the body … the mind, and for sounds … odours … flavours …
tangibles … mental objects … mind-consciousness, mind-contact, and
feeling arisen in dependence on mind-contact, be it painful feeling,
pleasant feeling, or neutral feeling.


“Because of being disenchanted, he does not delight in it. Because of
not delighting in it, he is liberated. Being liberated, he knows and sees:
‘Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has been established,
what had to be done has been done, I myself know that there will be
no receiving of any further existence.’”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


_As with the_ discourse on being impermanent, _in the same way also_

_[discourses] are to be recited in this way_ _for_ being _dukkha_, empty,
and not-self.


17 Parallel: [[SN35.43]] at SN IV 28,12.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 11


# 196. [Second Discourse on Impermanence] [18]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “All is impermanent.
What is all [that is impermanent]? That is, the eye is impermanent,
forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, that is also impermanent.


“In the same way the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the
mind [19] … mental objects … mind-consciousness, mind-contact, and
feeling arisen in dependence on mind-contact, be it painful, pleasant,
or neutral, that is also impermanent. [50b]


“A learned noble disciple who contemplates like this is liberated from
the eye, and is also liberated from forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact, be it painful,
pleasant, or neutral.


“In the same way he is also liberated from the ear … the nose … the
tongue … the body … the mind … mental objects … mind-consciousness, mind-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on mind-contact,
be it painful, pleasant, or neutral.

“I say that he is liberated from birth, [20] old age, disease, death, worry,
sorrow, vexation, and pain.”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


_As has been said for_ all is impermanent, _in the same way for_ all is
_dukkha_ … all is empty … all is not-self … all is of the nature of void


18 The parallel is the same as in the case of the preceding discourse [[SA195]]

19 The rendering follows the suggestion by Yìnshùn 1983: 220 note 4 to delete an
additional reference to 識.

20 Adopting a variant that adds 解脫.


12 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


activity … all is subject to destruction … all is subject to birth … all is
subject to old age … all is subject to disease … all is subject to death …
all is subject to worry … all is subject to affliction … all is subject to
arising … all is subject to cessation … all is of the nature to be understood … all is of the nature to be known … all is of the nature to be
abandoned … all is of the nature to be awakened to … all is to be
realized … all is [the domain] of Māra … all is within Māra’s power …
all is Māra’s tool … all is burning … all is ablaze … all is on fire, _for_
_all of these, each discourse is to be recited in full as above_ . [21]

# 197. [Discourse on Being on Fire] [22]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at the _cetiya_ at
Gayāsīsa together with a thousand monks, who were all former matted-hair brahmins.


At that time the Blessed One taught the thousand monks by way of
performing the three type of miracles. [23] What are the three? They are
the miracle of psychic power, the miracle of telepathy, and the miracle
of instruction.


For the miracle of psychic power, the Blessed One entered into an
attainment of concentration appropriate for the manifestation of his
ascent into the air towards the east to perform [the miracle of psychic
power] in the four postures of walking, standing, sitting, and reclining.


21 The translation is based on emending 二 to 一一; cf. also the discussion in Yìnshùn
1983: 220 note 6.

22 Parallels: [[SN35.28]] at SN IV 19,22 (= Vin I 34,14), [[EA24.5]] at T II 622b8, the _Catuṣ_ _pariṣat-sūtra_, Waldschmidt 1962: 316,6 (§26.2), the Dharmaguptaka _Vinaya_, T 1428
at T XXII 797a11, the Mahīśāsaka _Vinaya_, T 1421 at XXII 109b25, the Mūlasarvāstivāda _Vinaya_, Gnoli 1977: 230,10, with its Chinese and Tibetan counterparts in T
1450 at T XXIV 134b4 and Waldschmidt 1962: 317,7 (§26.2), as well as several biographies of the Buddha preserved in Chinese, such as, e.g., T 185 at T III 483a9 (which
just mentions the three miracles), T 189 at T III 650a22, T 191 at T III 962a11, and T
196 at T IV 151c29; cf. also Waldschmidt 1951/1967: 193.

23 [[SN35.28]] does not mention the three miracles and only has a counterpart to the last of
these three; cf. also the discussion in Anālayo 2015a: 26ff.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 13


He entered into concentration on fire and various type of flames
emerged in blue, yellow, red, white, crimson, and crystal colours. He
manifested fire and water concurrently. The lower part of his body
emitted fire and the upper part of his body emitted water, or else the
upper part of his body emitted fire and the lower part of his body
emitted water. In the same way he kept going around the four
directions. Then, having performed various miracles, the Blessed One
sat among the assembly. This is called the miracle of psychic power.


For the miracle of telepathy, [the Blessed One knew] such is the other
one’s mind, such is the other one’s intention, such is the other one’s
consciousness; the other one should think like this and should not
think like that, the other one should give up like this, the other one
should be established in direct realization like this. [24] This is called the
miracle of telepathy.


For the miracle of instruction, the Blessed spoke thus: “Monks, all is
on fire. What is all on fire? That is, the eye is on fire, forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, that is also on fire. [50c]


“In the same way the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the
mind is on fire, mental objects, mind-consciousness, mind-contact,
and feeling arisen in dependence on mind-contact, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, that is also on fire.


“With what is it on fire? It is on fire with the flames of lust, it is on
fire with the flames of anger, it is on fire with the flames of delusion,
and it is on fire with the flames of birth, old age, disease, death, worry,
sorrow, vexation, and pain.”


At that time, hearing what the Buddha had said, by not clinging the
minds of the thousand monks were liberated from the influxes. [25]


24 The translation “direct” is based on the assumption that 身 renders the instrumental
_kāyena_ (found at the present juncture in Waldschmidt 1962: 320,17 (§26.14) and
Gnoli 1977: 230,29), on the significance of which cf. Anālayo 2011: 379 note 203.

25 On the translation of 不起 as “not clinging” cf. Anālayo 2014: 8 note 17.


14 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 198. [First Discourse to Rāhula] [26]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha
on Mount Vulture Peak.


At that time the venerable Rāhula approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet, withdrew to stand to one side,
and said to the Buddha:


“Blessed One, how [should] one know and how [should] one see so
that in this body of mine with consciousness within and all external
signs [the sense of] ‘I’, ‘mine’, and the underlying tendency, fetter,
and attachment to the I-conceit will not be caused to arise?”


Then the Blessed One said to Rāhula: “It is well, Rāhula, you are able
to ask the Tathāgata about what has a very profound meaning.”


The Buddha said to Rāhula: “Understand it as it really is that the eye,
whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle,
sublime or repugnant, far or near, all that is not self, not distinct from
the self [in the sense of being owned by it], does not exist [within the
self, nor does a self] exist [within it].


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like this._


“Rāhula, engaging in knowing like this and seeing like this, in this
body of mine with consciousness within and all external signs [the
sense of] ‘I’, ‘mine’, and the underlying tendency, fetter, and attachment to the I-conceit are not caused to arise. Rāhula, in this way one
does not give rise to [the sense of] ‘I’, ‘mine’, and the underlying
tendency, fetter, and attachment to the I-conceit. Rāhula this is called


26 The present and the next discourse have no parallel among the Pāli discourses, although comparable expositions related to the five aggregates can be found in [[SN18.21–22]] at SN II 252,7 and [[SN22.91–92]] at SN III 135,24.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 15


abandoning craving and murky views by rightly comprehending the
unsurpassed transcendence of _dukkha_ .” [27]


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the venerable Rāhula was delighted and received it respectfully.


_As for_ the internal sense-spheres, _in the same way also for_ the external
sense-spheres of forms, sounds, odours, flavours, tangibles, mental objects, _for_ eye-consciousness … ear- … nose- … tongue- … body- …
and mind-consciousness, _for_ eye-contact … ear- … nose- … tongue- …
body- … and mind-contact, _for_ feeling arisen from eye-contact … ear- …
nose- … tongue- … body- … and feeling arisen from mind-contact,
_for_ perception arisen from eye-contact … ear- … nose- … tongue- …
body- … and perception arisen from mind-contact, _for_ intention arisen
from eye-contact … ear- … nose- … tongue- … body- … and intention arisen from mind-contact, _for_ craving arisen from eye-contact …
ear- … nose- … tongue- … body- … and craving arisen from mind-contact _, [discourses] are also to be recited as above_ .

# 199. [Second Discourse to Rāhula] [28]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in
the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Feeding Place.


At that time the Blessed One said to Rāhula: “How [should] one know
and how [should] one see so that in this body [of mine] with consciousness and all external signs there is no [sense of] an ‘I’, ‘mine’, and the
underlying tendency, fetter, and attachment to the I-conceit?” [51a]


27 Instead of “murky views”, according to an emendation suggested by Yìnshùn 1983:
223 note 3 the “continuity of bondage” is abandoned; this would correspond to the
expression found in an instruction to Rādha in [[SA123]] at T II 40b10, translated Anālayo 2015b: 22.

28 Cf. the comment above in note 26.


16 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


Rāhula said to the Buddha: “The Blessed One is the root of the Dharma, the eye of the Dharma, the foundation of the Dharma. It would be
well if the Blessed One were to explain the meaning of this fully to the
monks. Having heard it, the monks will uphold and receive it respectfully.”


The Buddha said to Rāhula: “It is well, listen to what I shall teach you.
Whatever eye, whether past, future or present, internal or external,
gross or subtle, sublime or repugnant, far or near, one rightly contemplates as it really is that all that is not self, not distinct from the self [in
the sense of being owned by it], does not exist [within the self, nor
does a self] exist [within it].


“Rāhula, the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is_
_also like this._


“Rāhula knowing like this and seeing like this, in this body of mine
with consciousness and all external signs, the [sense of] an ‘I’, ‘mine’,
and the underlying tendency, fetter, and attachment to the I-conceit do
not arise. Rāhula, in this way a monk goes beyond duality, is free from
all signs, at peace, and liberated. Rāhula, in this way a monk abandons
all craving and desire, turns around and leaves all bondage, and [attains]
the unsurpassed transcendence of _dukkha_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the venerable Rāhula was delighted and received it respectfully.


_As for_ the internal sense-spheres, _in the same way also for_ the external
sense-spheres … _up to_ … _for_ feeling arisen in dependence on mind-contact, _[discourses] are to be recited fully as above_ .


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 17


# 200. [Third Discourse to Rāhula] [29]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the venerable Rāhula approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet, withdrew to sit to one side,
and said to the Buddha:


“It would be well if the Blessed One were to teach me the Dharma so
that, on having heard the Dharma, I will in a quiet and secluded place
engage in meditative contemplation and abide in diligence. Having in
a quiet and secluded place engaged in meditative contemplation and
abided in diligence, I will contemplate in such a way [as to realize]
that for whose sake clansmen shave their hair and beard, with right
faith become homeless, go forth to train in the path, to practise and
uphold the holy life. I here and now will realize and know by myself
that: ‘Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done’, I myself know that there
will be no receiving of any further existence.”


Then the Blessed One, observing that Rāhula’s liberation of the mind
and his wisdom were not yet mature, that he was not yet ready to receive the higher Dharma, asked Rāhula: “Have you taught the five aggregates of clinging to people?” [30]


Rāhula said to the Buddha: “Not yet, Blessed One.”


The Buddha told Rāhula: “You should expound the five aggregates of
clinging to people.”


29 Parallels: [[MN147]] at MN III 277,21 and [[SN35.121]] at SN IV 105,11; for a comparative
study and for a translation cf. Anālayo 2011: 836f and 2012 respectively.

30 Su 2015: 120 points out that the Buddha’s instruction to Rāhula given in the present
discourse can also be found in T 212 at T IV 626b27, with the difference that here
Rāhula is advised to recite the discourses on conditionality, the five aggregates, and
the six sense-spheres, and after reflecting on these he becomes an arahant.


18 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


Then, having received this instruction from the Buddha, on another
occasion Rāhula expounded the five aggregates of clinging to people.
Having taught them, he again approached the Buddha, paid respect
with his head at the Buddha’s feet, withdrew to stand to one side, and
said to the Buddha:


“Blessed One, I have taught the five aggregates of clinging to people.
I would wish that the Blessed One teaches me the Dharma so that, [51b]
on having heard the Dharma, I will in a quiet and secluded place engage in meditative contemplation and abide in diligence … _up to_ …
knowing by myself that there will be no receiving of any further existence.”


Then the Blessed One, again observing that Rāhula’s liberation of the
mind and his knowledge were not yet mature, that he was not ready to
receive the higher Dharma, asked Rāhula: “Have you taught the six
sense-spheres to people?”


Rāhula said to the Buddha: “Not yet, Blessed One.”


The Buddha told Rāhula: “You should expound the six sense-spheres
to people.”


Then, on another occasion Rāhula expounded the six sense-spheres to
people. Having taught the six sense-spheres, he approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at [the Buddha’s feet], withdrew to
stand to one side, and said to the Buddha:


“Blessed One, I have expounded the six sense-spheres to people. I
would wish that the Blessed One teaches me the Dharma so that, on
having heard the Dharma, I will in a quiet and secluded place engage
in meditative contemplation and abide in diligence … _up to_ … knowing by myself that there will be no receiving of any further existence.”


Then the Blessed One, [again] observing that Rāhula’s liberation of
the mind and his knowledge were not yet mature, that he was not
ready to receive the higher Dharma, asked Rāhula: “Have you taught
the principle of causality to people?”


Rāhula said to the Buddha: “Not yet, Blessed One.”


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 19


The Buddha told Rāhula: “You should expound the principle of causality to people.”


Then Rāhula, having on another occasion given widely teachings on
the principle of causality to people, approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at [the Buddha’s] feet, withdrew to stand to one
side, and said to the Buddha:


“[May] the Blessed One teach me the Dharma so that, on having heard
the Dharma, I will in a quiet and secluded place engage in meditative
contemplation and abide in diligence … _up to_ … knowing by myself
that there will be no receiving of any further existence.”


Then the Blessed One, again observing that Rāhula’s liberation of the
mind and his knowledge were not yet mature … _to be spoken in full_
_up to_ … he told Rāhula: “You should in a quiet and secluded place
engage in meditative contemplation and examine the meaning of those
teachings you earlier taught.”


Then Rāhula, having received the Buddha’s instruction and orders,
contemplated and pondered the teachings he earlier had heard and
taught, examining their meaning. He thought: “All these teachings
proceed towards Nirvāṇa, flow towards Nirvāṇa, ultimately establish

[one] in Nirvāṇa.”


Then Rāhula went to the Buddha, paid respect with his head at [the
Buddha’s] feet, withdrew to stand to one side, and said to the Buddha:
“Blessed One, in a quiet and secluded place I contemplated and pondered the teachings I earlier had heard and taught, examining their
meaning. I understood that all these teachings proceed towards Nirvāṇa, flow towards Nirvāṇa, and ultimately establish [one] in Nirvāṇa.”


Then the Blessed One, observing that Rāhula’s liberation of the mind
and his knowledge were mature, [51c] that he was ready to receive the
higher Dharma, told Rāhula: “Rāhula, everything is impermanent.
What kind of things are impermanent? That is, the eye is impermanent,
forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact …” _as spoken above in detail_
_on impermanence_ .


20 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


Then Rāhula, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted, rejoiced, paid respect to the Buddha, and returned.


Then, having received the Buddha’s teaching, Rāhula engaged in meditative contemplation in a quiet and secluded place and abided in diligence. That for whose sake clansmen shave off their hair and beard,
don the yellow robes, and out of right faith go forth into homelessness
to train in the path, to practise the pure holy life … _up to_ … he here
and now realized and knew by himself that: “Birth for me has been
eradicated, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has
been done, I myself know that there will be no receiving of any further
existence.” He had become an arahant whose mind was well liberated.


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said Rāhula was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 201. [Discourse to a Monk] [31]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


Then a certain monk approached the Buddha, paid respect with his
head at the Buddha’s feet, withdrew to stand to one side, and said to
the Buddha: “Blessed One, knowing what, seeing what, does one step
by step reach the quick destruction of the influxes?”


Then the Blessed One said to that monk: “One should rightly contemplate impermanence. What kind of things are impermanent? That is,
one should contemplate the eye as impermanent, forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, [that is also] impermanent.


“One should contemplate the ear … the nose … the tongue … the
body … the mind as impermanent … mental objects … mind-consciousness, mind-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on


31 Parallel: [[SN35.56–57]] at SN IV 32,9.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 21


mind-contact, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, that is also impermanent. Monk, knowing like this, seeing like this, one step by step
reaches the destruction of the influxes.”


Then, hearing what the Buddha had said that monk was delighted. He
paid respect and left. [32]


_In the same way, as the discourse spoken to the monk, [other discourses_
_are to be recited] with this difference_ : “knowing what, seeing what …
does one step by step reach the destruction of all fetters … does one
abandon all bondages … does one abandon all underlying tendencies …
does one abandon all higher afflictions … does one abandon all fetters …
does one abandon all flows … does one abandon all yokes … does
one abandon all clinging … does one abandon all contacts … does one
abandon all hindrances … does one abandon all entanglements …
does one abandon all blemishes … does one abandon all craving …
does one abandon all [wrong] intentions … does one abandon wrong
view and give rise to right view … does one abandon ignorance and
give rise to knowledge?”


“Monk, in this way contemplate the eye as impermanent … _up to_ …
knowing like this, seeing like this, one step by step abandons ignorance and gives rise to knowledge.”


Then, hearing what the Buddha had said, that monk was delighted.
Being delighted, he paid respect and left.

# 202. [Discourse on Abandoning the View of Self] [33]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. [52a]


32 [[SN35.56–57]] (to be supplemented from [[SN35.53]]) do not report the monk’s delight
and departure.

33 Parallel: [[SN35.166]] at SN IV 148,1.


22 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


Then a certain monk approached the Buddha, paid respect with his
head at the Buddha’s feet, [withdrew to stand to one side], and said to
the Buddha: “Blessed One, knowing what, seeing what, does one step
by step abandon the view of self and give rise to the view of not-self? [34]


The Buddha said to that monk: “One rightly contemplates the eye as
not-self, [35] and one also rightly contemplates forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact, be
it painful, pleasant, or neutral, as not-self. In this way … _up to_ … one
also rightly contemplates feeling arisen in dependence on mind-contact, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, as not-self.


“Monk, knowing like this, seeing like this, one step by step abandons
the view of self and gives rise to the view of not-self.”


Then, hearing what the Buddha had said, that monk was delighted.
Being delighted, he paid respect and left. [36]

# 203. [Discourse on Being Able to Abandon One Thing] [37]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Vesālī in
Jīvaka’s Mango Grove. [38]


34 The monk’s inquiry in [[SN35.166]] at SN IV 148,2 only mentions abandoning the view
of self, not giving rise to the view of not-self.

35 The translation is based on emending 無常 to read 無我, in line with what is used
in the rest of the discourse (the occurrence of 無常 could easily be a copying error
caused by its occurrence in the preceding discourse). [[SN35.166]] speaks throughout
of not-self.

36 [[SN35.166]] does not report the monk’s delight and departure.

37 Parallel: [[SN35.79]] at SN IV 49,22.

38 [[SA203]] at T II 52a10: 耆婆拘摩羅藥師菴羅園, which Akanuma 1930/1994: 250
lists as one of the renderings of Jīvakambavana. According to the Pāli tradition, the
Mango Grove given by Jīvaka was rather situated at Rājagaha; cf. Malalasekera
1937/1995: 959f.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 23


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “If a monk is able to
abandon one thing, he then attains right knowledge and is able to
declare of himself: ‘Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has
been established, what had to be done has been done, I myself know
that there will be no receiving of any further existence.’” [39]


The monks said to the Buddha: “The Blessed One is the root of the
Dharma, the eye of the Dharma, the foundation of the Dharma. May
he expound it. Having heard it, the monks will uphold and receive it
respectfully.”


The Buddha said to the monks: “Listen and pay proper attention to
what I shall teach you. Monks, because of abandoning what one
thing … _up to_ … no receiving of any further existence? That is,
becoming dispassionate with ignorance and giving rise to knowledge,
one attains right comprehension and is able to declare of oneself:
‘Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has been established,
what had to be done has been done, I myself know that there will be
no receiving of any further existence.’”


Then a certain monk rose from his seat, adjusted his robes so as to
bare his right shoulder, paid respect to the Buddha, knelt on the
ground with his right knee and, with palms together, said to the
Buddha: “Blessed One, knowing what, seeing what, does one become
dispassionate with ignorance and give rise to knowledge?”


The Buddha said to the monk: “One should rightly examine the eye as
impermanent, and also rightly contemplate forms, eye-consciousness,


39 [[SN35.79]] at SN IV 49,22 sets in with a monk approaching the Buddha with the inquiry if there is one thing whose abandoning leads to abandoning ignorance and giving rise to knowledge. The Buddha replies that the one thing is abandoning ignorance,
which then leads the monk to inquire how to know and how to see so as to abandon
ignorance, similar to the question posed later on in [[SA203]] Bodhi 2000: 1405 note
42 comments on this part of the exchange in [[SN35.79]] that, “though it may sound redundant to say that ignorance must be abandoned in order to abandon ignorance, this
statement underscores the fact that ignorance is the most fundamental cause of bondage, which must be eliminated to eliminate all the other bonds.” Given that [[SA203]]
does not have such a statement, perhaps the presentation in [[SN35.79]] is just the result
of a textual error.


24 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact, be it
painful, pleasant, or neutral, as impermanent.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like this._


“Monk, knowing like this and seeing like this, one becomes
dispassionate with ignorance and gives rise to knowledge.”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 204. [Discourse on Understanding and Seeing as it Really Is]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Vesālī in
Jīvaka’s Mango Grove.


At that time the Blessed One said to the venerable Ānanda: “One
should understand the eye as it really is and see it as it really is; as the
eye, so one should also understand as they really are and see as they
really are forms, [40] eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen
in dependence on eye-contact, [52b] be it painful, pleasant, or neutral.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like this._


“One who has understood the eye as it really is and seen it as it really
is, gives rise to disenchantment with it, and gives also rise to disenchantment with forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling
arisen in dependence on eye-contact, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like this._


40 The translation follows the suggestion by Yìnshùn 1983: 253 note 1 to delete an additional reference to 眼.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 25


“Being disenchanted, he does not delight in it. Not delighting in it, he
becomes liberated. Being liberated, he knows and sees: ‘Birth for me
has been eradicated, the holy life has been established, what had to be
done has been done, I myself know that there will be no receiving of
any further existence.’”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 205. [Discourse on the Udāna ]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Vesālī in
Jīvaka’s Mango Grove.


At that time the Blessed One, having recited all of the verses of the
_Udāna_, said to the venerable Ānanda: “The eye is impermanent, _duk_     _kha_, of a nature to change and become otherwise. Forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, is also impermanent, _dukkha_, of
a nature to change and become otherwise.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like this._


“A learned noble disciple who contemplates like this becomes liberated from the eye, and also becomes liberated from forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact [be it painful, pleasant, or neutral]. He becomes liberated from the
ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind, mental objects,
mind-consciousness, mind-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence
on mind-contact, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral. I say that he becomes liberated from birth, old age, disease, death, worry, sorrow,
vexation, and pain.”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


26 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


# 206. [First Discourse at Jīvaka’s Mango Grove] [41]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Vesālī in
Jīvaka’s Mango Grove. [42]


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “You should make a
diligent effort at meditation, calm the mind within. [43] Why is that?
Monks, in this way diligently practising meditation and calming the
mind within, one understands [things] as they really manifest. What
does one understand as it really manifests? One understands as it
really manifests the eye, and one also understands as they really manifest forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that_ . All these things are impermanent and conditioned, [44] and in
this way one understands them also as they really manifest.”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 207. [Second Discourse at Jīvaka’s Mango Grove] [45]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Vesālī in
Jīvaka’s Mango Grove. [46] [52c]


41 Parallel: [[SN35.160]] at SN IV 144,17; cf. also [[SN35.100]] at SN IV 80,28.

42 [[SN35.160]] at SN IV 144,17 also mentions Jīvaka’s Mango Grove as the venue of the
discourse, but locates it at Rājagaha.

43 [[SN35.160]] at SN IV 144,20 does not mention the need to calm the mind within. A
discourse quotation paralleling the statement in [[SA206]] can be found in the _Yogācā_  _rabhūmi_, Delhey 2009: 208,14 (§4.2.1): _pratisaṃlayanāya bhikṣavo yogam āpad_  _yadhvam adhyātmaṃ cetaḥśamathāyeti_ .

44 A reference to being conditioned is not found in [[SN35.160]] in fact the same is also
missing from the earlier exposition in relation to the eye in [[SA206]]

45 Parallels: [[SN35.159]] at SN IV 144,29; cf. also [[SN35.99]] at SN IV 80,11.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 27


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “You should cultivate
boundless concentration, energetically and with collected mindfulness. [47] Why is that? Having cultivated boundless concentration, energetically and with collected mindfulness, [things] then manifest as
they really are. What manifests as it really is? The eye manifests it
really is … _to be spoken in full up to_ … All these things, being impermanent and conditioned, manifest as they really are.”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 208. [Discourse on the Eye in the Present] [48]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Vesālī in
Jīvaka’s Mango Grove.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “The eye in past and
future is impermanent, what to say of the eye in the present! A learned
noble disciple who contemplates in this way is not concerned with the
eye of the past and does not rejoice in the eye of the future. Being disenchanted with the eye in the present, he does not delight in it, becomes
free from desire for it, and proceeds towards disenchantment with it.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


46 [[SN35.159]] at SN IV 144,29 also mentions Jīvaka’s Mango Grove as the venue of the
discourse, but locates it at Rājagaha.

47 [[SN35.159]] at SN IV 144,33 does not qualify concentration as boundless, nor does it
mention mindfulness. A discourse quotation paralleling the statement in [[SA207]] can
be found in the _Yogācārabhūmi_, Delhey 2009: 209,7 (§4.2.2.1): _samādhiṃ bhikṣavo_
_bhāvayata, apramāṇam nipakāḥ pratismṛtā [[ITI48]] Parallel: [[SN35.7]] at SN IV 4,1.


28 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


_Just as for_ being impermanent, _in the same way [discourses] are also_
_to be recited for_ being _dukkha_, empty, and not self _._


_Just as the four discourses for_ the internal sense-spheres, _in the same_
_way also four discourses for_ the external sense-spheres, [i.e.] forms,
sounds, odours, flavours, tangibles, mental objects, _and four discourses_
for the internal and external sense-spheres _are to be recited_ .

# 209. [Discourse on the Six Spheres of Contact] [49]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Vesālī in
Jīvaka’s Mango Grove.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “There are six spheres
of contact. What are the six? They are the sphere of contact of the
eye … the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the sphere of
contact of the mind.


“[As for] recluses and brahmins who do not understand as it really is
the arising of these six spheres of contact, their cessation, their
gratification, their danger, and the escape from them, it should be
known that these recluses and Brahmins depart from my teaching, are
far from my discipline, just as the sky in regard to the earth.” [50]


Then a certain monk rose from his seat, arranged his robes, paid respect to the Buddha and, with palms together, said to the Buddha: “I
am endowed with understanding as it really is of the arising of these


49 Parallel: [[SN35.71]] at SN IV 43,11; cf. also [[SN35.72]] at SN IV 44,1 and [[SN35.73]] at
SN IV 44,32. [[SN35.72]] differs from [[SN35.71]] and [[SA209]] in so far as the Buddha’s
teaching to the monk takes the form of asking him if he does _not_ see a self in any of
the senses, etc.; in [[SN35.73]] the Buddha takes up the impermanent nature of the
senses, followed by their lack of satisfaction and not-self nature. Another difference
is that in [[SN35.73]] the exposition leads up to the pericope description of awakening
in terms of birth being eradicated, etc.

50 [[SN35.71]] at SN IV 43,11 (as well as [[SN35.72]] at SN IV 44,1, and [[SN35.73]] at SN IV
44,32) speaks of “monks” who, by not understanding, are far from the Buddha’s
teaching and discipline. This fits the context better than the reference to recluses and
brahmins in [[SA209]] [[SN35.71]] [[SN35.72]] and [[SN35.73]] also do not have the
comparison with the sky and the earth.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 29


six spheres of contact, their cessation, their gratification, their danger,
and the escape from them.” [51]


The Buddha said to the monk: “I will now ask you, answer according
to my question. Monk, do you see the sphere of contact of the eye as
self, as distinct from the self [in the sense of being owned by it], as
existing [within the self, or a self] existing [within it]?”


He replied: “No, Blessed One”.


The Buddha said to the monk: “It is well, it is well. The sphere of
contact of the eye is not self, it is not distinct from the self [in the
sense of being owned by it], it does not exist [within the self, nor does
a self] exist [within it]. By not clinging the mind of one who knows
and sees this as it really is will be undefiled by attachment, and his
mind will be liberated from the influxes. This is called [one] who has
abandoned the first sphere of contact, [53a] having understood it, abandoning it at the root like the cut off crown of a Palmyra tree, so that in
future it will never again arise, that is, eye-consciousness and forms.


“Do you see the sphere of contact of the ear … the nose … the tongue …
the body … the mind as self, as distinct from the self [in the sense of
being owned by it], as existing [within the self, or a self] existing

[within it]?”


He replied: “No, Blessed One”.


The Buddha said to the monk: “It is well, it is well. The sphere of contact of the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the sphere of
contact of the mind is not self, it is not distinct from the self [in the
sense of being owned by it], it does not exist [within the self, nor does
a self] exist [within it]. By not clinging the mind of one who knows
and sees this as it really is will be undefiled by attachment, and his
mind will be liberated from the influxes. [52] This is called a monk who


51 In [[SN35.71]] at SN IV 43,16 (as well as in [[SN35.72]] at SN IV 44,6, and [[SN35.73]] at
SN IV 45,5) the monk rather says that he does not understand.

52 Adopting the variant 心 instead of 以, in keeping with the formulation used for the
eye.


30 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


has abandoned the six spheres of contact, having understood them,
abandoning them at the root like the cut off crown of a Palmyra tree,
so that in future they will never again arise, [53] that is …
mind-consciousness and mental objects.”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 210. [Discourse on Extensive Joy and Extensive Suffering] [54]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Vesālī in
Jīvaka’s Mango Grove.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “There is extensive
joy and extensive suffering. [55] Why is that? There are six spheres of
contact in hell. [56] Living beings born in that hell encounter with the
eye forms that are disagreeable and do not encounter agreeable forms,
they encounter forms one would not like to think of and do not
encounter forms one would like to think of, they encounter bad forms


53 The rendering follows the suggestion by Yìnshùn 1983: 255 note 3 to emend 欲 to
read 永, in keeping with the formulation used for the eye.

54 Parallel: [[SN35.135]] at SN IV 126,1.

55 In [[SN35.135]] at SN IV 126,1 the Buddha highlights that it is a gain for the monks to
have the opportunity to live the holy life.

56 In [[SN35.135]] at SN IV 126,3 the Buddha affirms that he has seen the hell called “six
spheres of contact”. The commentary, Spk II 400,5, explains that no hell of this name
actually exists, in fact this name applies to all hells; followed by adding that in the
present context the reference is in particular to Avīci. Had this indeed been the original intention, it would have certainly been more straightforward for the Buddha just
to refer to Avīci directly. In view of the fact that no such affirmation by the Buddha
is reported in [[SA210]] perhaps the formulation in [[SN35.135]] could be the result of a
later addition. This would explain the coming into being of a remark that, due to
being concerned with one particular hell called “six spheres of contact”, does not
seem to fit a contexts that is clearly about the six spheres of contact in any hell realm.
The same applies to the case of heaven, where in [[SN35.135]] at SN IV 126,16 the
Buddha affirms that he has seen the heaven called “six spheres of contact”, which
Spk II 400,9 then explains to intend the city of Tāvatiṃsa.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 31


and do not encounter good forms. Because of this condition, their entire experience is one of worry and pain [for a long time]. [57]


“They encounter with the ear sounds … with the nose odours … with
the tongue flavours … with the body tangibles … and with the mind
they cognize mental objects that are disagreeable and do not encounter
what is agreeable, they encounter what one would not like to think of
and do not encounter what one would like to think of, they encounter
bad mental objects and do not encounter good mental objects. Because
of this condition, their [entire] experience is one of worry and pain for
a long time.


“Monks, there are [also] six spheres of contact [in heaven]. Living
beings born in that realm encounter with the eye what is agreeable and
do not encounter what is disagreeable, they encounter forms that one
would like to think of and do not encounter forms one would not like
to think of, they encounter good forms and do not encounter bad
forms. Because of this condition, their entire experience is one of joy
and delight for a long time.


“They encounter with the ear sounds … with the nose odours … with
the tongue flavours … with the body tangibles … and with the mind
they cognize mental objects that are agreeable and not disagreeable,

[they encounter] what one would like to think of and not what one
would not like to think of, they encounter what is good and not what is
bad. [Because of this condition, their entire experience is one of joy
and delight for a long time].”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


57 Here and below, such a conclusion is not drawn in [[SN35.135]]


32 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


# 211. [Discourse on the Five Sense Pleasures] [58]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Vesālī in
Jīvaka’s Mango Grove.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “Formerly, when I
had not yet attained full awakening, I was meditating alone in a quiet
place and thought: ‘I should examine: What direction does my own
mind often incline towards? My own mind often pursued the five
strands of sense pleasure of the past, [53b] it seldom pursues the five
strands of sense pleasure of the present, and it very seldom keeps revolving in those of the future. [59]


“When I had contemplated that I often pursued the five [strands] of
sense pleasure of the past, [60] I thoroughly aroused energy and effort to
guard myself so that I would not again follow after the five strands of
sense pleasure of the past. Because of this diligent self protection, I
gradually drew closer to supreme and right awakening. [61]


“Monks, you also often pursued the five strands of sense pleasure of
the past, very seldom those of the present and the future. You should
now also increasingly protect yourself, because the mind often pursued the five strands of sense pleasure of the past, and you will soon
attain the destruction of the influxes, the influx-free liberation of the
mind and liberation by wisdom, knowing here and now for yourself
and realizing that: ‘Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has
been established, what had to be done has been done, I myself know
that there will be no receiving of any further existence.’ [62]


58 Parallel: [[SN35.117]] at SN IV 97,17.

59 In [[SN35.117]] at SN IV 97,19 past and present sense pleasures hold similar attraction
and only those of the future are qualified do so to a lesser degree.

60 The translation is based on an emendation in the CBETA edition of 正 to 五.

61 This remark has no counterpart in [[SN35.117]]

62 [[SN35.117]] does not indicate that protection will lead the monks to liberation, although the same is implicit.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 33


“Why is that? In dependence on seeing forms with the eye, feeling
arises within, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral. In dependence on the
ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind and mental
objects, feeling arises within, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral. [63]


“Therefore, monks, you should realize that sphere wherein the eye
ceases and which then is apart from a perception of forms, wherein the
ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind ceases and
which then is apart from a perception of mental objects.”

The Buddha said: “You should realize that sphere.” [64] Having said this,
he entered his hut to sit in meditation. Then, soon after the Blessed
One had left, a group of many monks had this discussion: “The Blessed
One has taught us the essentials of the teaching in brief, and without
analyzing it in detail he has entered his hut to sit in meditation.


“The Blessed One has said: ‘You should realize that sphere, wherein
the eye ceases and which then is apart from perception of forms, wherein the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind ceases
and which then is apart from perception of mental objects.’ Now we
still do not understand herein the teaching which the Blessed One has
taught in brief. Among this community, who now has the power of


63 This exposition of the dependent arising of feeling has no counterpart in [[SN35.117]]
which after the injunction to make an effort in relation to the five sensual pleasures
proceeds directly to the need to experience the cessation of the eye, etc.

64 Here and below, the translation is based on emending 六入處 to 入處, in line with
the formulation found in the previous reference, of which the present and the next
occurrence are a repetition. The expression 六入處 only fits the context as part of
Ānanda’s explanation later in the discourse, when he clarifies that the Buddha spoke
in reference to the cessation of the six sense-spheres. The Buddha’s original injunction,
just as in [[SN35.117]] is instead concerned with a single “sphere”, namely the experience of Nirvāṇa; cf. also Spk II 391,4: _nibbānasmiṃ hi cakkhu-ādīni c’eva_
_nirujjhanti, rūpasaññādayo ca nirujjhantī ti._ The same idea of a single _āyatana_ as
representative of Nirvāṇa is also reflected in [[UD8.1]] at [[UD80.9]] That such a reference
can easily be misunderstood can be seen in the translation by Choong 2000: 75 of the
first occurrence of the singular _āyatane_ in [[SN35.117]] at SN IV 98,3 as
“sense-spheres” and thus in the plural. Yet, the statement is not about knowing a
plurality of sense-spheres, but rather refers to the single experience of Nirvāṇa, and it
is with this “sphere” of experiencing Nirvāṇa that the six sense-spheres come to
cease simultaneously.


34 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


wisdom and the capability of expounding to us in detail the meaning
herein of the teaching which the Blessed One has taught us in brief?”


They further thought: “The only one is the venerable Ānanda, who
constantly attends on the Blessed One and who is constantly praised
by the great teacher as a wise practitioner of the holy life. The venerable Ānanda is the only one who is capable of expounding to us the
meaning herein of the teaching which the Blessed One has taught in
brief. We should now all together approach the venerable Ānanda and
ask him about its meaning. We will all respectfully remember it as

[the venerable] Ānanda explains it.”


At that time the group of many monks approached the venerable Ānanda.
Having exchanged polite greetings, they sat to one side and said to the
venerable Ānanda: “Venerable, you should know that the Blessed One
has taught us the essentials of the teaching in brief … _as said above_ … we
together ask that Ānanda would explain to us in detail its meaning.”

The venerable Ānanda said to the monks: [65] “Listen and pay proper
attention, [53c] I shall herein explain in detail to you the meaning of the
teaching the Blessed One has taught in brief. What the Blessed One
has taught in brief was in regard to the cessation of the six sense-spheres.
On purpose saying more than that [single expression], he said: ‘The
sphere wherein the eye ceases and which then is apart from perception
of forms, wherein the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the
mind sense-sphere ceases and which then is apart from perception of
mental objects.’ Of this teaching, which the Blessed One had taught in


65 In [[SN35.117]] at SN IV 99,28 Ānanda tells the monks that they should have asked the
Buddha directly, comparing their coming to him instead to someone who, being in
quest of heartwood, takes instead the branches and leaves of a tree. This is a standard
pericope in the early discourses, regularly employed by monk disciples when asked
to explain a short saying by the Buddha. Yet, given that the Buddha had withdrawn
into his hut, it could hardly be expected that the monks ask him for an explanation.
This makes the presentation in [[SA211]] where Ānanda does not censure the monks
for not having asked the Buddha himself, fit the narrative context more naturally. In
relation to [[SN35.117]] it could easily be that during oral transmission a passage
describing such censure was applied to all instances where a disciple explains a short
statement by the Buddha, even to instances where this does not fit the narrative
setting so well.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 35


brief when he entered his hut to sit in meditation, I have now analyzed its
meaning for you.” [66]


When the venerable Ānanda had explained its meaning, hearing what
he had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 212. [Discourse on Cultivating Diligence] [67]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. [68]


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “I do not say to all
monks that they [should] cultivate diligence, and I also do not say to
all monks that they [should] not cultivate diligence. [69]


“In relation to what type of monk do I not say that he [should] cultivate diligence? If a monk has become an arahant and has eradicated
all the influxes, he is free from the heavy burdens, has gained his own
benefit, eradicated all the fetters of existence, and his mind has been
rightly liberated.


“To a type of monks like this I do not say that they [should] cultivate
diligence. Why is that? Because such monks have already undertaken

[the cultivation of] diligence, they are no more capable of undertaking
a negligent matter. Because I now see that those venerable ones have


66 In [[SN35.117]] at SN IV 100,19 Ānanda encourages the monks to get his explanation
checked by the Buddha (who in the meantime must have come out of his hut again),
which is another standard pericope. The Buddha confirms the correctness of Ānanda’s
explanation and lauds his wisdom.

67 Parallels: [[SN35.134]] at SN IV 124,22 and a discourse quotation in the _Abhidharma_        _kośabhāṣya_, Pradhan 1967: 375,13 (cf. also Pāsādika 1989: 109 §438 and Wogihara
1936: 588,20), with a fuller quotation preserved in Śamathadeva’s _Abhidharmakośo_         _pāyikāṭīkā_, [[DN4094]] _nyu_ 30b4 or Q 5595 _thu_ 67a2, translated by Dhammadinnā 2016.

68 [[SN35.134]] at SN IV 124,22 gives the location as Devadaha, a town of the Sakyans.

69 In [[SN35.134]] at SN IV 124,25 the Buddha specifies that such cultivation (or non-cultivation) of diligence is done in relation to the six spheres of contact.


36 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


attained the fruit of diligence, I do not say to them that they [should]
cultivate diligence. [70]


“In relation to what type of monks do I say that they [should] cultivate
diligence? If monks are at the stage of a trainee ( _sekha_ ), they have not
yet attained the supreme appeasement of the mind and are [still] proceeding towards becoming established in Nirvāṇa.


“To a type of monks like this I say that they [should] cultivate diligence. [71] Why is that? As such a monk trains in the faculties and delights the mind accordingly, [72] is endowed with the necessities of life,
and associates with good friends, he will soon attain the destruction of
the influxes, the influx-free liberation of the mind and liberation by
wisdom, knowing here and now for himself and realizing that: ‘Birth
for me has been eradicated, the holy life has been established, what
had to be done has been done, I myself know that there will be no receiving of any further existence.’


“Why is that? In relation to forms cognized by the eye which he could
crave for with delight and become defiled by attachment, on having
seen them that monk does not delight in them, does not praise them, is
not defiled by them, and is not established in the bondage of attachment. As he does not delight in them, not praise them, is not defiled
by them, and is not established in [the bondage of] attachment, he
diligently progresses in the appeasing of body and mind.


“With the mind fully established in peace without forgetfulness, always concentrated and single-minded, with boundless joy in the
Dharma, but still attaining the foremost concentrative attainment, he
will certainly not regress by following a form with the eye. [73] In rela

70 This sentence has no counterpart in [[SN35.134]] which concludes its description of
arahants with the indication that they are incapable of negligence.

71 Pradhan 1967: 375,13: _śaikṣaysa cāpramādakaraṇīye ’pramādakaraṇīyaṃ vadāmīty_ .

72 [[SN35.134]] at SN IV 125,17 instead describes the arising of energy, mindfulness,
bodily tranquillity, and mental concentration; it does not continue after that with a
description of the attainment of the destruction of the influxes, etc.

73 Adopting the variant 退減 instead of 退滅; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 261 note 2.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 37


tion to [sounds cognized by] the ear … [odours cognized by] the
nose … [flavours cognized by] the tongue … [tangibles cognized by]
the body … mind-objects cognized by the mind _it is also like this_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully. [54a]

# 213. [First Discourse on Two Things] [74]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “I will expound to
you two things, listen and pay proper attention. What are the two? The
eye and forms are two, the ear and sounds … the nose and odours …
the tongue and flavours … the body and tangibles … the mind and
mental objects are two. These are called two things. [75]


“Suppose a recluse or brahmin speaks like this: ‘These are not two. The
things declared by the recluse Gotama as being two, they are not two’,
and he proclaims two things according to his own ideas. Yet, on being
questioned about what he says, he will not know, [76] and be increasingly
bewildered, because this is not within his domain. [77] Why is that?


“In dependence on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. In
dependence on the coming together of these three things there is contact. From contact arises feeling, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral.


“He does not understand as it really is the arising of these feelings, the


74 Parallels: [[SN35.92]] at SN IV 67,10 and a discourse quotation in the _Abhidharmakośa_        _vyākhyā_, Wogihara 1936: 581,14 (although this is addressed to a single monk, instead
of to a group, as in [[SN35.92]] and [[SA213]]).

75 Wogihara 1936: 581,14: _tena hi bhikṣo dvayaṃ te deśayiṣyāmi tac chṛṇu sādhu ca_
_suṣṭhu ca manasikuru bhāṣiṣye. dvayam katamat? cakṣū-rūpāṇi yāvan mano-dharmāś_
_ceti_ .

76 Adopting the variant 問 instead of 聞; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 262 note 2.

77 The remainder of the exposition in [[SA213]] has no parallel in [[SN35.92]]


38 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


cessation of feelings, the gratification of feelings, the danger in feelings, and the escape from feelings.


“He breeds the bodily knot of lustful desires, he breeds the bodily knot
of anger, he breeds the bodily knot of clinging to rules, and he breeds
the bodily knot of the view of self, and he breads and increases evil
and unwholesome states. [78] In this way the entire great mass of _dukkha_
completely arises from it. [79]


“ _In the same way_ in dependence on the ear [and sounds] … the nose

[and odours] … the tongue [and flavours] … the body [and
tangibles] … the mind and mental objects, mind-consciousness arises.

[In dependence on] the coming together of these three things there is
contact … _to be recited in full as above._


“Again, in dependence on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises.
The coming together of these three things is contact. In dependence on
contact there is feeling, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral. One understands in this way the arising of these feelings, their cessation, their
gratification, their danger, and the escape from them.


“Having understood it in this way, one does not breed the bodily knot
of lustful desires, does not breed the bodily knot of anger, does not


78 The translation is based on emending 身觸 to 身縛, on the assumption that the underlying Indic original might have had a reference to _kāyagrantha_, given that a reference to bodily contact fails to make sense in the context. The first three items mentioned in [[SA213]] correspond to the first three of the four _kāyagantha_ s known in Pāli
discourses, where the fourth is instead dogmatism. In the case of a listing of the four
_kāyagantha_ s in [[DN33]] at DN III 230,18, the parallel [[DA9]] at T I 50c6 has instead the
view of self as fourth, 我見身縛. The same is also the case for another discourse in
the _Saṃyukta-āgama_, although this speaks just of four _grantha_ s, [[SA490]] at T II
127a15: 四縛: 謂貪欲縛, 瞋恚縛, 戒取縛, 我見縛 . A listing of the four
_kāyagrantha_ s in the _Saṅgītiparyāya_, T 1536 at T XXVI 399c23, agrees with the Pāli
tradition on reckoning dogmatism to be the fourth of this set, 實執取身繫; cf. also
the reconstructed Sanskrit fragment of the _Saṅgīti-sūtra_ in Stache-Rosen 1968: 118
and the _Jñānaprasthāna_, the * _Mahāvibhāṣā_, and the _Yogācārabhūmi_, T 1544 at T
XXVI 929b18, T 1545 at T XXVII 248c8, T 1579 at T XXX 314c20 (preceded by the
four types of clinging where the fourth is indeed concerned with the advocacy of a
self).

79 The translation is based on adopting the variant 聚 instead of 集; cf. also Yìnshùn
1983: 262 note 3.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 39


breed the bodily knot of clinging to rules, does not breed the bodily
knot of the view of self, and does not breed evil and unwholesome
states. In this way evil and unwholesome states cease and the entire
great mass of _dukkha_ ceases.


“[In dependence] on the ear [and sounds] … the nose [and odours] …
the tongue [and flavours] … the body [and tangibles] … the mind and
mental objects _it is also like this._


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 214. [Second Discourse on Two Things] [80]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “There are two conditions for the arising of consciousness. [81] What are the two? That is, the
eye and forms, the ear and sounds, the nose and odours, the tongue
and flavours, the body and tangibles, the mind and mental objects …
_to be recited fully in this way up to_ … because this is not within his
domain. Why is that?


“In dependence on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. That

[eye] is impermanent, conditioned, thought out, dependently arisen, [82]
and forms, just as eye-consciousness, are impermanent, conditioned,
thought out, dependently arisen.


80 Parallels: [[SN35.93]] at SN IV 67,22 and a discourse quotation in the _Abhidharmakośa_        _bhāṣya_, Pradhan 1967: 295,14 (cf. also Pāsādika 1989: 97 §377, Muroji 1993: 67, and
Wogihara 1936: 705,10); cf. also Dhammadinnā 2016.

81 Pradhan 1967: 295,14: _dvayaṃ pratītya vijñanasyotpāda ity._ After the corresponding
statement, [[SN35.93]] at SN IV 67,25 continues directly with what in [[SA214]] comes
only in the next paragraph, namely the impermanent nature of the two conditions for
the arising of consciousness, followed by drawing the conclusion that this implies
that consciousness arisen in dependence on these conditions must also be impermanent.

82 Here and below, [[SN35.93]] does not refer to the conditioned and depedently arisen
nature of the eye, etc.


40 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


“The coming together of these three things is contact. Having been
contacted, there is feeling. Having felt, there is intention. Having intended, there is perception. All these things are impermanent, conditioned, thought out, dependently arisen. That which is contact, [feeling], perception, and intention [in relation to] the ear … the nose …
the tongue … the body … the mind _is also like that._ ” [54b]


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 215. [Discourse to Puṇṇa] [83]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time a monk, the venerable Puṇṇa, approached the Buddha,
paid respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet, withdrew to stand to
one side, and said to the Buddha: “The Blessed One teaches the
Dharma that is directly visible, he teaches the extinction of the fire, he
teaches what is immediate, he teaches what leads onward, he teaches
what is to be seen right here, he teaches what is to be realized in dependence on oneself. Blessed One, what is the Dharma that is directly
visible … _up to_ … what is to be realized in dependence on oneself?”


The Buddha said to Puṇṇa: “It is well, Puṇṇa, that you are able to
make this inquiry. Puṇṇa, listen and pay proper attention to what I
shall teach you. [84]


“Puṇṇa, on having seen forms with the eye, a monk experiences the
forms and he experiences that there is lust for the forms: ‘within me
there is lust for forms cognized by the eye.’ He knows it as it really is
that ‘within me there is lust for forms cognized by the eye.’


83 Parallels: [[SN35.70]] at SN IV 41,15, whose monk protagonist is Upavāṇa/Upavāna,
not Puṇṇa.

84 In [[SN35.70]] at SN IV 41,22 the Buddha straightaway begins his exposition, without
explicitly approving of the fact that the monk had posed such a question.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 41


“Puṇṇa, on seeing forms with the eye and experiencing the forms, one
who experiences lust for the forms and knows as it really is that
‘within me there is lust for forms cognized by the eye’, this is called a
directly visible teaching. [85]


“What is the extinction of the fire? What is immediate? What leads
onward? What is to be seen right here? What is to be realized in dependence on oneself?


“Puṇṇa, on having seen forms with the eye, a monk experiences the
forms and he experiences that lust for forms does not arise. He knows
as it really is that ‘within me there is no lust for forms cognized by the
eye, [86] I experience no arising of lust for forms.’


“Puṇṇa, suppose on having seen forms with the eye, a monk experiences the forms, [87] and experiences that lust for forms does not arise,
and he knows form as it really is. Knowing as it really is that he experiences no arising of lust for forms, this is called the extinction of
the fire, immediate, leading onward, to be seen right here, and what is
to be realized in dependence on oneself.


"The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Puṇṇa was delighted and received it respectfully.


85 In [[SN35.70]] at SN IV 41,28 the Buddha at this juncture also brings in the other epithets of the Dharma (which show some variations compared to [[SA215]]) and then
turns to the other senses.

86 The translation is based on an emendation in the CBETA edition that adds 無.

87 The translation is based on adopting the variant 色 instead of 已, in line with the
formulation found earlier.


42 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


# 216. [First Discourse on the Great Ocean] [88]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “Speaking about ‘the
great ocean’ is what fools speak about, it is not what noble ones speak
about. It is just more or less water.


“What do the noble ones call ‘the ocean’? That is, on having cognized
forms with the eye one has thoughts of craving, is defiled by attachment, [89] and lusts for delightful bodily, verbal, and mental activities. [90]
This is called the ocean. The whole world, from _asura_ s to _deva_ s and
humans, are all sinking in such lust for delight. They are like the contents of a dog’s stomach, [91] they are like a disorderly bundle of grass,
they are entangled, shackled, and trapped in this world and that
world. [92]


“ _In the same way also for_ the ear cognizing sounds … the nose cognizing odours … the tongue cognizing flavours … the body cognizing
tangibles … they are entangled, shackled, and trapped in this world
and that world, _also [to be recited] in the same way._ ” [93] [54c]


88 Parallel: [[SN35.188]] at SN IV 157,24.

89 The translation is based on adopting the variant 染 instead of 深; cf. also Yìnshùn
1983: 267 note 2.

90 [[SN35.188]] does not refer to bodily, verbal, and mental activities.

91 In [[SN35.188]] at SN IV 158,8 the expression that comes before a reference to having
become like grass and reeds (which would be the counterpart to the bundle of grass
mentioned next in [[SA216]]), reads _guṇaguṇikajāta_, with the variants _kulaguṇṭhikajātā_
(and _gulāguṇḍikajātā_ ); cf. also B [e] : _kulagaṇṭhikajātā_, C [e] : _guḷāguṇṭhikajātā_, and S [e] :
_kulāguṇḍikajātā_ . Perhaps the reference to a dog’s stomach, T II 54b27: 狗肚, has
come about as the result of a phonetic rendering of a possibly corrupted reference to
_guṇṭha_ (according to Pulleyblank 1991: 83 and 109, the two characters 狗 and 肚
would reflect an early middle Chinese pronunciation _kəw_ ’and _dɔ_ _[h]_ ).

92 [[SN35.188]] at SN IV 158,8 adds that they are not beyond bad realms of rebirth.

93 [[SN35.188]] continues with a poem, which in the PTS edition is part of the next discourse, [[SN35.189]]


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 43


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


_Just as for_ bodily, verbal, and mental deeds, _in the same way also for_
lust, anger, and delusion, and for old age, disease, and death, _[discourses]_
_are to be recited in this way. Just as the three discourses on the five_
_faculties, also three discourses on the six faculties are to be recited in_
_this way._

# 217. [Second Discourse on the Great Ocean] [94]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “The so-called ocean
is what fools speak about in this world, not what noble ones speak
about. The ocean is just more or less water.


“For a person the eye is the great ocean, whose waves are those forms.
If one is able to endure the waves of forms, one crosses over the great
ocean of the eye and finishes with the waves and whirlpools of its
waters, [95] and with its evil reptiles and female demons. [96]


“For a person the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the
mind is the great ocean, whose waves are … odours … flavours …
tangibles … mental objects. If one is able to endure the waves of
mental objects, one crosses over the great ocean of the mind and
finishes with its waves and whirlpools, and with its evil reptiles and
female demons.”


At that time the Buddha spoke a poem:


94 Parallel: [[SN35.187]] at SN IV 157,1.

95 Here and below, adopting the variant 洄 instead of 迴; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 267
note 5.

96 [[SN35.187]] at SN IV 157,7 adds the image of a brahmin who stands on firm ground.


44 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


“The great ocean with its tremendous waves,
Its evil reptiles and frightful demons,
Is difficult to cross. One who is able to cross it
Is free from its waters without remainder. [97]


“Being able to abandon all _dukkha_,
One no more receives a further existence,
Forever [has attained] Nirvāṇa,
And will never again be negligent.”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 218. [Discourse on the Path] [98]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “I will now teach you
the path to the arising of _dukkha_ and the path to the cessation of _duk_ _kha_ . [99] Listen and pay proper attention to what I shall teach you.


“What is the path to the arising of _dukkha_ ? In dependence on the eye
and forms, eye-consciousness arises. The coming together of these
three things is contact. In dependence on contact, there is feeling. In
dependence on feeling, there is craving. In dependence on craving,
there is clinging. In dependence on clinging, there is becoming. In
dependence on becoming, there is birth. In dependence on birth, old
age, disease, death, worry, sorrow, vexation, and pain arise.


97 [[SN35.187]] at SN IV 157,20 has only a counterpart to this first stanza.

98 Parallel: [[SN35.106]] at SN IV 86,14.

99 [[SN35.106]] at SN IV 86,14 just speaks of the arising and cessation of _dukkha_, without
bringing in the path.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 45


“In the same way the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the
mind _is also [to be recited] like that._ This is called the path to the arising of _dukkha_ .


“What is the path to the cessation of _dukkha_ ? In dependence on the
eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. The coming together of these
three things is contact. With the cessation of contact, feeling then
ceases. [100] With the cessation of feeling, craving then ceases. With the
cessation of craving, clinging then ceases. With the cessation of clinging, becoming then ceases. With the cessation of becoming, birth then
ceases. With the cessation of birth, old age, disease, death, worry, sorrow, vexation, and pain then cease. In this way the entire great mass of
_dukkha_ ceases.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also to_
_be recited like that._ [55a] This is called the path to the cessation of _duk_       _kha_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 219. [First Discourse on the Path to Nirvāṇa] [101]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “I will now teach you
the path to Nirvāṇa. What is the path to Nirvāṇa? That is, contemplate
the eye as impermanent. Forms, eye-consciousness, and feeling arisen
in dependence on eye-contact that is experienced within, be it painful,
pleasant, or neutral, that is also impermanent.


100 [[SN35.106]] at SN IV 86,27 instead continues with the dependent arising of feeling
based on contact and then begins the exposition of cessation only with craving. This
seems a more meaningful presentation, since the arising of craving does not inevitably follow from the experience of feeling, hence this is indeed the juncture where
the dependent arising of _dukkha_ can be averted.

101 Parallel: [[SN35.146]] at SN IV 133,19.


46 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that._ This is called the path to Nirvāṇa.”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 220. [Second Discourse on the Path to Nirvāṇa] [102]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “There is a path leading to Nirvāṇa. What is the path leading to Nirvāṇa? Contemplate the
eye as not-self. Contemplate also forms, eye-consciousness, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact that is experienced within, be
it painful, pleasant, or neutral, as being not-self. [103]


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that._ This is called the path leading to Nirvāṇa.”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 221. [Discourse on Clinging]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “There is a path that
leads to all [types of] clinging. What is the path that leads to all [types
of] clinging? In dependence on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness
arises. The coming together of these three things is contact. In dependence on contact, there is feeling. In dependence on feeling, there is


102 Parallel: [[SN35.148]] at SN IV 134,26.

103 The rendering follows the suggestion by Yìnshùn 1983: 269 note 5 to emend 無常
to read 非我, in line with the formulation used previously for the case of the eye.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 47


craving. In dependence on craving, there is clinging. Therefore there
is clinging and what is clung to.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that._ Therefore there is clinging and what is clung to. This is
called the path that leads to all [types of] clinging.”


“What is the path of abandoning all [types of] clinging? In dependence on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. The coming together of these three things is contact. With the cessation of contact,
feeling then ceases. With the cessation of feeling, craving then ceases.
With the cessation of craving, clinging then ceases.


“In the same way the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the
mind _is also like that._ [This is called the path of abandoning all types
of clinging].”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 222. [First Discourse on Understanding] [104]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “You should understand all things that are to be understood, all things that are to be
discerned. [105] Listen and pay proper attention to what I shall teach you.
What are all things that are to be understood, all things that are to be
discerned? [55b]


“Monks, the eye is a thing to be understood, a thing to be discerned.
Forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in depend

104 Parallel: [[SN35.25]] at SN IV 16,15 and a discourse quotation in the _Abhidharmakośa_        _bhāṣya_, Pradhan 1967: 465,3 (cf. also Pāsādika 1989: 124 §504).

105 Pradhan 1967: 465,3: _sarvābhijñeyaṃ vo bhikṣavo dharmaparyāyaṃ deśayiṣyāmīty_ .
The corresponding part in [[SN35.25]] at SN IV 16,15 adds that all (things) should also
be abandoned.


48 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


ence on eye-contact and experienced within, be it painful, pleasant, or
neutral, all these are things to be understood, things to be discerned. [106]


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 223. [Second Discourse on Understanding] [107]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “I do not say that
without understanding and without discerning one thing, one attains
the unsurpassed transcendence of _dukkha_ . [108] What is the one thing of
which I do not say that, without understanding and without discerning
it, one attains the unsurpassed transcendence of _dukkha_ ? That is, I do
not say that, without understanding and without discerning the eye,
one attains the unsurpassed transcendence of _dukkha_ .


106 Pradhan 1967: 465,4: _cakṣur ābhijñeyaṃ rūpāṇi cakṣurvijñānaṃ cakṣuḥsaṃsparśo_
_yad api tac cakṣuḥsaṃsparśapratyayam adhyātmam utpadyate veditaṃ sukhaṃ_
_duḥkhaṃ vā aduḥkhāsukhaṃ vā yāvat manaḥsaṃsparśapratyayam_ .

107 Parallels: [[SN35.26]] at SN IV 17,8 and discourse quotations in the _Abhidharmakośa_ _bhāṣya_, Pradhan 1967: 10,24 (cf. also Pāsādika 1989: 22 §13), and in the _Abhidhar_  _makośavyākhyā_, Wogihara 1932: 4,16, with a fuller quotation preserved in Śamathadeva’s _Abhidharmakośopāyikāṭīkā_, [[DN4094]] _ju_ 19a5 or Q 5595 _tu_ 21a8, translated by
Dhammadinnā 2016. A closely similar discourse is [[SN35.27]] at SN IV 18,25, which
differs slightly from [[SN35.26]] by first defining what the “all” refers to and then indicating that this all needs to be understood, etc. Since [[SN35.26]] instead applies the need
to understand, etc., individually to each sense, etc., it is a closer parallel to [[SA223]]

108 Pradhan 1967: 10,24: _nāham ekadharmam api anabhijñāyāparijñāya duḥkhasyānta_ _kriyāṃ vadāmīti_ ; cf. also Wogihara 1932: 4,16. [[SN35.26]] at SN IV 17,8 speaks of the
need to know, fully understand, become dispassionate towards, and abandon all.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 49


“I also do not say that without understanding and without discerning
forms, [109] eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact and experienced within, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, one attains the unsurpassed transcendence of _dukkha_ .


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that_ .” [110]


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 224. [First Discourse on Abandoning] [111]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “All things [related to]
desire should be abandoned. [112] What are all things [related to] desire
that should be abandoned? That is, the eye is [one of] all the things

[related to] desire that should be abandoned. Forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact and
experienced within, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, all these things

[related to] desire should be abandoned.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


109 The rendering follows the suggestion by Yìnshùn 1983: 274 note 2 to emend 見 to
read 識, in line with the formulation used earlier.

110 In [[SN35.26]] at SN IV 17,33 the Buddha continues by expounding the corresponding
positive case, when understanding, etc., leads to eradicating _dukkha_ .

111 Parallel: [[SN35.24]] at SN IV 15,20.

112 [[SN35.24]] at SN IV 15,20 just speaks of abandoning all, without qualifying this all as
being related to desire.


50 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


# 225. [Second Discourse on Abandoning] [113]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “I do not say that,
without understanding and without abandoning one thing, one [attains]
the unsurpassed transcendence of _dukkha._ [114] What is the one thing of
which I do not say that, without understanding and without abandoning
it, one [attains] the unsurpassed transcendence of _dukkha_ ? That is, I do
not say that, without understanding and without abandoning the eye,
one [attains] the unsurpassed transcendence of _dukkha_ .


“I do not say of forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling
arisen in dependence on eye-contact and experienced within, be it
painful, pleasant, or neutral, that, without understanding and without
abandoning all these, one [attains] the unsurpassed transcendence of
_dukkha_ .


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that_ .”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully. [55c]

# 226. [First Discourse on Conceiving] [115]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “I will now teach you
the abandoning of all conceiving. Listen and pay proper attention to
what I shall teach you. What should not to be conceived of? That is,


113 Parallel: [[SN35.25]] at SN IV 16,15.

114 [[SN35.25]] at SN IV 16,15 instead speaks of understanding and abandoning “all”.

115 The parallel is the same as for [[SA227]]


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 51


do not conceive of a self in the seeing of forms, do not conceive of the
eye as belonging to the self, do not conceive of it as belonging to
another. Also do not conceive of and delight in forms, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact and
experienced within, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, as a self, as belonging to the self, and do not conceive of and delight in it as belonging to another. [116]


“Do not conceive of the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body …
the mind _is also like that_ .”


“For one who does not conceive in this way, there is nothing in the
world to cling to as permanent. Because of not clinging to anything,
he is not attached to anything. Because of not being attached to anything, he personally realizes Nirvāṇa, [knowing]: ‘Birth for me has
been eradicated, the holy life has been established, what had to be
done has been done, I myself know that there will be no receiving of
any further existence.’”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


_As spoken above on not conceiving the eye, etc.,_ not conceiving all
things _is also [to be recited] in this way._

# 227. [Second Discourse on Conceiving] [117]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


116 The rendering follows the suggestion by Yìnshùn 1983: 274 note 6 to emend 樂 to
read 屬, in line with the formulation used earlier.

117 Parallel: [[SN35.90]] at SN IV 64,32. A closely similar discourse is [[SN35.91]] with the
difference that at SN IV 67,3 it also refers to the aggregates, elements, and sense-spheres.
These are not mentioned in [[SN35.90]] and [[SA227]] The same holds for the preceding
discourse, [[SA226]] which differs from [[SN35.90]] and [[SA227]] by just speaking of the
need to abandon all conceiving, without qualifying conceiving as a disease, etc., and
also by not bringing in the Tathāgata.


52 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “Conceiving is a disease, conceiving is an ulcer, conceiving is a thorn. Because of being
established in the absence of conceiving, the Tathāgata is free from
disease, free from the ulcer, free from the thorn.


“Therefore a monk, who wishes to seek being established in the absence of conceiving, being free from disease, free from the ulcer, free
from the thorn, that monk should not conceive of the eye as a self, as
belonging to a self, and he should not conceive of the eye as [belonging] to another. He should not conceive of forms, eye-consciousness,
eye-contact, and feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact and experienced within, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, as a self, as belonging to the self or as [belonging] to another.


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that_ .”


“Monks, one who does not conceive in this way then does not cling to
anything. [118] Because of not clinging to anything, he is not attached to
anything. Because of not being attached to anything, he personally
realizes Nirvāṇa, [knowing]: ‘Birth for me has been eradicated, the
holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, I
myself know that there will be no receiving of any further existence.’”


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


_As in relation to_ the eye _, etc_ ., _each of the remaining topics are to be_
_recited in this way_ .

# 228. [Discourse on What Increases]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


118 The translation is based on an emendation in the CBETA edition of 眼 to 則, cf.
also Yìnshùn 1983: 272.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 53


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “I will now teach you
what is of a nature to increase and what is of a nature to cease. What is
of a nature to increase? That is, in dependence on the eye and forms,
eye-consciousness arises. The coming together of these three things is
contact. In dependence on contact, there is feeling … _to be spoken in_
_full up to_ … this is the arising of the entire great mass of _dukkha_ . This
is called being of a nature to increase. [56a]


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that_ . This is called being of a nature to increase.


“What is of a nature to cease? In dependence on the eye and forms,
eye-consciousness arises. The coming together of these three things is
contact. With the cessation of contact, feeling then ceases … _to be_
_spoken in full up to_ … the cessation of the entire great mass of _duk_       _kha_ .


“The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind _is also_
_like that_ . This is called being of a nature to cease.” [119]


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


_As for_ increasing and ceasing _, in the same way also for_ being of a nature to rise up, being of a nature to change while remaining, being of a
nature to rise, and being of a nature to cease, _[discourses] are to be_
_recited as above_ .


119 Adopting the variant 滅 instead of 減.


54 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


# 229. [Discourse on What is With Influxes and Without Influxes] [120]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: “I will now teach you
what is of a nature to be with influxes and to be without influxes.
What is of a nature to be with influxes? That is, it is the eye and
forms, [121] eye-consciousness, eye-contact, feeling arisen in dependence on eye-contact that is experienced within, be it painful, pleasant,
or neutral, [which is mundane]. [122]


“It is the ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the mind and
mental objects, mind-consciousness, mind-contact, feeling arisen in
dependence on mind-contact that is experienced within, be it painful,
pleasant, or neutral, which is mundane. This is called being of a nature
to be with influxes.


“What is of a nature to be without influxes? That is, it is … supramundane mind and mental objects, mind-consciousness, mind-contact,
feeling arisen in dependence on mind-contact that is experienced
within, be it painful, pleasant, or neutral, which is supramundane. This
is called being of a nature to be without influxes.”


120 Parallels: discourse quotations in the _Abhidharmakośabhāṣya_, Pradhan 1967: 197,9
or 439,16 (cf. also Pāsādika 1989: 74 §270 and 121 §491), and in the _Abhidharma_   _kośavyākhyā_, Wogihara 1932: 355,26 and 675,7; with a fuller quotation preserved in
Śamathadeva’s _Abhidharmakośopāyikāṭīkā_, [[DN4094]] _ju_ 34a2 or Q 5595 _tu_ 37a4, translated by Dhammadinnā 2016.

121 Pradhan 1967: 197,9: _sāsravā dharmāḥ katame, yāvad eva cakṣur yāvad eva rūpā_ _ṇīti_ ; cf. also Pradhan 1967: 439,16 and Wogihara 1932: 355,26, and a longer quote in
Wogihara 1932: 675,7: _sāsravā dharmāḥ katame_ . _yāvad eva cakṣur yāvanti eva_
_rūpāṇi yāvad eva cakṣurvijñānam, yāvad yāvān eva kāyo yāvanty eva spraṣṭavyāni_
_yāvad eva kāyavijñānam [[ITI122]] [[SA229]] at T II 56a13 applies the qualification 世俗者 to the other senses, wherefore in the translation the same has been supplemented for the eye.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 55


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


56 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


Abbreviations

B [e] Burmese edition

C [e] Ceylonese edition


D Derge edition


DĀ _Dīrgha-āgama_ (T 1)


DN _Dīgha-nikāya_


EĀ _Ekottarika-āgama_ (T 125)


MN _Majjhima-nikāya_


Q Peking edition

S [e] Siamese edition


SĀ _Saṃyukta-āgama_ (T 99)


SN _Saṃyutta-nikāya_


Spk _Sāratthappakāsinī_


T Taishō edition, CBETA


Ud _Udāna_


Vin _Vinayapiṭaka_



On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 57


References


Akanuma, Chizen 1929/1990: _The Comparative Catalogue of Chinese Āga-_
_mas & Pāli Nikāyas_, Delhi: Sri Satguru.


——— 1930/1994: _A Dictionary of Buddhist Proper Names_, Delhi: Sri Satguru.


Anālayo 2011: _A Comparative Study of the Majjhima-nikāya_, Taipei: Dharma
Drum Publishing Corporation.


——— 2012: “Teaching and Liberation – Rāhula's Awakening in the Saṃyukta-āgama”, in _Dharmapravicaya, Aspects of Buddhist Studies,_
_Essays in Honour of N.H. Samtani_, L. Shravak and C. Willemen (ed.),
1–21, Delhi: Buddhist World Press.


——— 2014: “On the Five Aggregates (4) – A Translation of Saṃyukta-āgama Discourses 33 to 58”, _Dharma Drum Journal of Buddhist Studies_,
14: 1–71.


——— 2015a: “The Buddha’s Fire Miracles”, _Journal of the Oxford Centre_
_for Buddhist Studies_, 11: 9–42.


——— 2015b: “On Rādha and Views – A Translation of _Saṃyukta-āgama_
Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6)”, _Dharma Drum Journal of_
_Buddhist Studies_, 17: 1–42.


Bodhi, Bhikkhu 2000: _The Connected Discourses of the Buddha, A New_
_Translation of the Saṃyutta Nikāya_, Boston: Wisdom Publications.


Choong, Mun-keat 2000: _The Fundamental Teachings of Early Buddhism, A_
_Comparative Study Based on the Sūtrāṅga Portion of the Pāli Saṃ-_
_yutta-Nikāya and the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama_, Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz.


Chung, Jin-il 2008: _A Survey of the Sanskrit Fragments Corresponding to the_
_Chinese Saṃyuktāgama_, Tokyo: Sankibo.


Delhey, Martin 2009: _Samāhitā Bhūmiḥ, Das Kapitel über die meditative Ver_       _senkung im Grundteil der Yogācārabhūmi_, Wien: Arbeitskreis für
tibetische und buddhistische Studien, Universität Wien.


Dhammadinnā, Bhikkhunī 2016: “A Translation of the Quotations in Śamathadevaʼs Abhidharmakośopāyikā-ṭīkā Parallel to the Chinese Saṃyukta-āgama Discourses 212, 222, 223, 224, 225 and 229”, _Dharma_
_Drum Journal of Buddhist Studies_ (forthcoming).


58 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


Gnoli, Raniero 1977 (part 1): _The Gilgit Manuscript of the Saṅghabhedavastu,_
_Being the 17th and Last Section of the Vinaya of the Mūlasarvāsti-_
_vādin_, Rome: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.


Malalasekera, G.P. 1937/1995 (vol. 1): _Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names_,
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.


Muroji, Yoshihito G. 1993: _Vasubandhus Interpretation des Pratītyasamut-_
_pāda, Eine kritische Bearbeitung der Pratītyasamtupādavyākhyā_
_(Saṃskāra- und Vijñānavibhaṅga)_, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner.


Pāsādika, Bhikkhu 1989: _Kanonische Zitate im Abhidharmakośabhāṣya des_
_Vasubandhu_, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.


Pradhan, Pralhad 1967: _Abhidharmakośabhāṣya_, Patna: K.P. Jayaswal
Research Institute.


Pulleyblank, Edwin G. 1991: _Lexicon of Reconstructed Pronunciation in_
_Early Middle Chinese, Late Middle Chinese and Early Mandarin_,
Vancouver: UBC Press.


Stache-Rosen, Valentina 1968: _Dogmatische Begriffsreihen im Älteren_
_Buddhismus II; Das Saṅgītisūtra und sein Kommentar Saṅgīti-_
_paryāya_, Berlin: Akademie Verlag.


Su, Ken 蘇錦坤 2015: “《出曜經》研究, Notes on Chuyao Jing, T212”,
_Singaporean Journal of Buddhist Studies_, 2: 65–175.


Waldschmidt, Ernst 1951/1967: “Vergleichende Analyse des Catuṣpariṣatsūtra”, in _Von Ceylon bis Turfan, Schriften zur Geschichte, Literatur,_
_Religion und Kunst des indischen Kulturraums, Festgabe zum 70._
_Geburtstag am 15. Juli 1967 von Ernst Waldschmidt_, 164–202,
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.


——— 1962 (vol. 3): _Das Catuṣpariṣatsūtra, eine kanonische Lehrschrift_
_über die Begründung der Buddhistischen Gemeinde, Text in Sanskrit_
_und Tibetisch, verglichen mit dem Pāli nebst einer Übersetzung der_
_chinesischen Entsprechung im Vinaya der Mūlasarvāstivādins, auf_
_Grund von Turfan-Handschriften herausgegeben und bearbeitet_,
Berlin: Akademie Verlag.


Wogihara, Unrai 1932: _Sphuṭārthā Abhidharmakośavyākhyā, The Work of_
_Yaśomitra_, Tokyo: Sankibo, vol. 1.


——— 1936: _Sphuṭārthā Abhidharmakośavyākhyā by Yaśomitra_, _Part II_,
Tokyo: The Publishing Association of Abhidharmakośavyākhyā.


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 59


Yìnshùn 釋印順 1983: 《雜阿含經論會編》, Tapei: 正聞出版社, vol. 1
(page references are to the actual edition, not to the front matter).


60 法鼓佛學學報第 18 期（2016）


六根品 ── 漢譯《雜阿含經》（卷八）188 至 229 經
英文譯注


無著比丘


法鼓文理學院研究員


摘要：


本文為漢譯《雜阿含經》第八卷經號 188 至 229 之英文譯注。


關鍵詞：


雜阿含經、六根


On the Six Sense-spheres (1) － A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 188 to 229 (Fascicle 8) 61


