---
title: Sa 06
author: 111 - 138
category: dhamma
contribution: translation
sutta_theme:
  - Views
---

# On Rādha and Views ― A Translation of Saṃyukta-āgama Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6)

Bhikkhu Anālayo

Research Fellow
Dharma Drum Institute of Liberal Arts


法鼓佛學學報第 17 期 頁 1-42（民國 104 年），新北市：法鼓文理學院
Dharma Drum Journal of Buddhist Studies, no. 17 pp. 1-42 (2015)
New Taipei City: Dharma Drum Institute of Liberal Arts
ISSN: 1996-8000


# Abstract

This article translates the sixth fascicle of the _Saṃyukta-āgama_, which
contains discourses 111 to 138. [1]

# Contents


CONNECTED DISCOURSES ON RĀDHA


111. Discourse on the Conduit to Becoming


112. Discourse on Penetrative Knowledge


113. Discourse on Eradicating the _Dukkha_ of Bodily Form


114. Discourse on Understanding _Dukkha_


115. Discourse on Worry and Sorrow


116. Discourse on Viewing as a Self or as Belonging to a Self


       - Date of submission: 2014/12/29; date of review: 2015/05/19.
I am indebted to Mike Running, Shi Syinchen, and Ken Su for their collaboration and
to the journal's proof readers for helpful suggestions.

1 The translated text is found at T II 37c6 to 42c8, this being the sixth fascicle in the
Taishō edition corresponding to the sixth fascicle in the reconstructed order of this
collection according to, e.g., Choong 2000: 243, Bucknell 2006: 686, and Chung
2008: 23. Yìnshùn 1983, however, places the present and the next fascicle at a considerably later point in his edition, as a result of which [[SA111]] to [[SA138]] in the
Taishō edition correspond to discourses nos. 1652 to 1790 in his edition. The present
fascicle contains two _Saṃyukta-āgama_ sections: [[SA111]] to [[SA129]] correspond to the
section on Rādha, whereas [[SA130]] to [[SA138]] correspond to the first part of the section on views (which continues into the next fascicle). In what follows, my identification of Pāli parallels is based on Akanuma 1929/1990 and Yìnshùn 1983, in the case
of Sanskrit fragment parallels I am indebted to Chung 2008. Here and elsewhere, I
adopt Pāli for proper names and doctrinal terms in order to facilitate comparison with
the Pāli parallels, except for terms like Dharma and Nirvāṇa, without thereby intending to take a position on the original language of the _Saṃyukta-āgama_ manuscript
used for translation. In the case of reproducing Sanskrit texts from romanized editions,
I follow the conventions of the respective editors (except for capitalization). My reconstruction of the respective titles is based on Akanuma 1929/1990, in the case of
the same title being repeated I add "first", "second", etc.


2 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


117. Discourse on Being with Influxes and Obstructions


118. Discourse on Lust, Hatred, and Delusion


119. Discourse on Desire, Craving, and Delight


120. First Discourse on Māra


121. Discourse on Being of a Mortal Nature


122. Discourse on the Living Being


123. Discourse on Craving, Delight, and Lust


124. Second Discourse on Māra


125. Discourse on What is Made by Māra


126. Discourse on Being of a Mortal Nature


127. First Discourse on Being of the Nature to be Abandoned


128. Second Discourse on Being of the Nature to be Abandoned


129. Third Discourse on Being of the Nature to be Abandoned


CONNECTED DISCOURSES ON VIEWS


130. Discourse on Seeking Out the Great Teacher


131. Discourse on Becoming Habituated


132. Discourse on Not Becoming Habituated


133. Discourse on What is the Cause


134. First Discourse on Abandoning Doubt


135. Second Discourse on Abandoning Doubt


136. Discourse on What Matter is the Cause


137. Third Discourse on Abandoning Doubt


138. Fourth Discourse on Abandoning Doubt

# Keywords


Saṃyukta-āgama; Rādha; Views


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 3


# 111. [Discourse on the Conduit to Becoming] [2]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula. [3] Then an attendant monk by the name of Rādha, [4] rising from
meditation in the afternoon, approached the Buddha, paid respect at
the Buddha's feet, withdrew to sit at one side, and said to the Buddha:
"As the Blessed One has taught, there is a flow of becoming. What is
called the flow of becoming? What is called the cessation of the flow
of becoming?"


The Buddha said to Rādha: "It is well for you to be asking this. I shall
explain it to you, namely what is the flow of becoming. A foolish unlearned worldling does not understand as it really is the arising of
bodily form, the cessation of bodily form, the gratification in bodily
form, the danger in bodily form, and the escape from bodily form.
Because of not understanding it as it really is, he craves for and delights in bodily form, he commends it, he grasps it, and is defiled by
attachment [to it]. In dependence on craving and delight for bodily
form, there is clinging. In dependence on clinging, there is becoming.
In dependence on becoming, there is birth. In dependence on birth, old
age, disease, death, worry, sorrow, vexation, and pain increase. In this
way this entire great mass of _dukkha_ arises. Feeling … perception …
formations … consciousness _is also like this_ . This is called the flow of
becoming. [5]


2 Parallel: [[SN23.3]] at SN III 190,26.

3 [[SA111]] at T II 37c6: 摩拘羅山. The same rendering recurs in T 194 at T IV 144b4 in
a reference to the place where the Buddha was held to have spent the sixth rainy season retreat after his awakening, which the commentary on the _Buddhavaṃsa_, Bv-[[AN3.25]] allocates to Mount Maṅkula, alternatively referred to as Mount Makula; cf. Rhys
Davids 1877/1911: 70f, Bigandet 1858/1914: 211, and Mochizuki 1940: 30. [[SN23.3]]
at SN III 190,26 instead takes place at Sāvatthī.

4 Malalasekera 1938/1998: 730 note 1 explains that Rādha appears to have been an attendant of Sāriputta.

5 [[SN23.3]] at SN III 191,1 does not present a contrast between the unlearned worlding
and the noble disciple, but simply points out that desire, lust, delight, craving, cling

4 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


"A learned noble disciple understands as it really is the arising of
bodily form, the cessation of bodily form, the gratification in bodily
form, the danger in bodily form, and the escape from bodily form.
Because of understanding it as it really is, he does not give rise to
craving and delight in regard to such bodily form, to commending it,
to grasping it, or to being defiled by attachment [to it]. Because of
being without craving and delight, commending, grasping, and being
defiled by attachment, craving for bodily form ceases. With the cessation of craving, clinging ceases. With the cessation of clinging, becoming ceases. With the cessation of becoming, birth ceases. With the
cessation of birth, old age, disease, death, worry, sorrow, pain and
vexation cease. [6] In this way this entire great mass of _dukkha_ ceases.


Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this_ .


"This is called the flow of becoming and the cessation of the flow of
becoming, as taught by the Tathāgata."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 112. [Discourse on Penetrative Knowledge] [7]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula. [8] Then an attendant monk by the name of Rādha, rising from
meditation in the afternoon, approached the Buddha, paid respect at
the Buddha's feet, withdrew to sit at one side, and said to the Buddha:
"Blessed One, as the Blessed One has taught, there is penetrative understanding of bodily form, penetrative understanding of feeling …


ing, adherence, and underlying tendencies for the five aggregates constitute the conduit to existence, _bhavanetti_ .

6 Adopting a variant that adds 滅; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 484 note 5.

7 Parallel: [[SN23.4]] at SN III 191,8; the same exposition, although not addressed to
Rādha, can be found in [[SN22.106]] at SN III 159,23, which has a parallel in [[SA72]] at T
II 19a4 (translated Anālayo 2013: 32).

8 [[SN23.4]] at SN III 191,8 instead takes place at Sāvatthī.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 5


perception … formations … consciousness. Blessed One, what is
penetrative understanding of bodily form, penetrative understanding
of feeling … perception … formations … consciousness?" [9]


The Buddha said to Rādha: "It is well for you to be asking this. I shall
explain it to you. The eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of worry, sorrow, pain and vexation in relation to
bodily form, this is called the penetrative understanding of bodily
form. The eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of worry, sorrow, pain and vexation in relation to feeling …
perception … formations … consciousness, [38a] this is called the
penetrative understanding of feeling …perception … formations …
consciousness." [10]


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 113. [Discourse on Eradicating the Dukkha of Bod- ily Form]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount
Makula, with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha. [11]


Then a group of heterodox wanderers approached the venerable Rādha.
Having exchanged polite greetings, they withdrew to sit at one side.
They asked the venerable Rādha:


"For what sake have you gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
recluse Gotama?"


9 In [[SN23.4]] at SN III 191,10 the Buddha broaches the topic himself, without being
prompted by an inquiry by Rādha.

10 In [[SN23.4]] at SN III 191,13 the Buddha distinguishes between the following: the five
aggregates as things to be understood; the destruction of lust, hatred, and delusion as
their understanding; and the arahant as the one who has understood.

11 Adopting a variant that adds 時有 before the reference to Rādha; cf. also Yìnshùn
1983: 484 note 6.


6 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


The venerable Rādha replied: "I have gone forth to cultivate the holy
life under the Blessed One for the sake of abandoning _dukkha_ ."


They asked again: "For the sake of abandoning what kind of _dukkha_ have
you gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the recluse Gotama?"


Rādha replied: "I have gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
Blessed One for the sake of abandoning the _dukkha_ of bodily form; I
have gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the Blessed One for the
sake of abandoning the _dukkha_ of feeling … perception … formations … consciousness."


Then the heterodox wanderers, hearing what the venerable Rādha had
said, were not pleased in their minds. They rose from their seats,
blamed him, and left.


At that time the venerable Rādha, knowing that the heterodox wanderers had left, thought: "Having proceeded to speak in this way, did I not
misrepresent the Blessed One? Did I speak as I should speak? Did I
speak according to the Dharma, did I speak the Dharma in accordance
with the Dharma? On being closely interrogated by others, will I not
be censured and fall into an occasion of being defeated?"


At that time the venerable Rādha, having risen from meditation in the
afternoon, approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the
Buddha's feet, and withdrew to sit at one side. [12] He completely told
the Buddha about the above matter, [saying]: "Blessed One, having
proceeded to speak in this way, did I not incur a fault? Did I not misrepresent the Blessed One? On being closely interrogated by others,
will I not be censured and fall into an occasion of being defeated? Did
I speak as I should speak? Did I speak according to the Dharma, did I
speak the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma?"

The Buddha said to Rādha: "You spoke truthfully. [13] You did not misrepresent the Tathāgata. You spoke as you should speak. You spoke


12 Adopting the variant 坐 instead of 住.

13 Adopting the variant 誠 instead of 成.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 7


according to the Dharma, speaking the Dharma in accordance with the
Dharma. Why is that? Rādha, bodily form is _dukkha_ . One goes forth

[under me] to cultivate the holy life for the sake of abandoning that
_dukkha_ . Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness is _duk_      _kha_ . One goes forth [under me] to cultivate the holy life for the sake
of abandoning that _dukkha_ ."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 114. [Discourse on Understanding Dukkha] [14]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha. [15]


Then a group of heterodox wanderers approached the venerable Rādha.

[38b] Having exchanged polite greetings, they withdrew to sit at one
side. They asked Rādha:


"For what sake have you gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
recluse Gotama?"


Rādha replied: "I have gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
Blessed One for the sake of understanding _dukkha_ ."


Then the heterodox [wanderers], hearing what Rādha had said, were
not pleased in their minds. They rose from their seats, blamed him,
and left.


14 Akanuma 1929/1990: 33 identifies [[SN35.81]] at SN IV 50,26 as a parallel. But this
discourse is not related to Rādha and its contents differ. In [[SN35.81]] at SN IV 51,1 a
group of monks inform the Buddha that they had been asked by heterodox wanderers
about the purpose of the holy life under the Buddha. They had replied that the purpose was the penetrative understanding of _dukkha_ . The Buddha confirms that this
reply is correct and then proceeds to expound the nature of _dukkha_ with the help of
six sense-sphere experience. Thus [[SN35.81]] in spite of some thematic overlap,
would not qualify for being a parallel to [[SA114]]

15 My translation follows Yìnshùn 1983: 484 note 7, who suggests to add 時有 before
the reference to Rādha.


8 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


At that time Rādha, having risen from meditation in the afternoon,
approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the Buddha's
feet, and withdrew to sit at one side. He completely told the Buddha
about the above matter, [saying]: "Blessed One, having proceeded to
speak in this way, did I not get into misrepresenting the Blessed One?
On being closely interrogated by others, will I not be censured and fall
into an occasion of being defeated? Did I not speak as I should speak?
Did I not speak according to the Dharma, did I not speak the Dharma
in accordance with the Dharma?"


The Buddha said to Rādha: "You spoke truthfully. You did not misrepresent the Tathāgata. On being closely interrogated by others, you
will not be censured and fall into an occasion of being defeated. You
spoke as you should speak. You spoke according to the Dharma,
speaking the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. Why is that?
Rādha, bodily form is _dukkha_ . One goes forth under the Tathāgata to
cultivate the holy life for the sake of understanding that _dukkha_ . Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness is _dukkha_ . One goes
forth under the Tathāgata to cultivate the holy life for the sake of understanding that _dukkha_ ."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 115. [Discourse on Worry and Sorrow]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha.


Then a group of heterodox wanderers approached the venerable Rādha.
Having exchanged polite greetings, they withdrew to sit at one side.
They asked Rādha:


"For what sake have you gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
recluse Gotama?"


Rādha replied: "I have gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
Tathāgata for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of worry, sorrow, vexation, and pain in rela

On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 9


tion to bodily form. I have gone forth to cultivate the holy life under
the Tathāgata for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation,
appeasement, and vanishing of worry, sorrow, vexation, and pain in
relation to feeling … perception … formations … consciousness."


Then the group of heterodox wanderers, having heard this, were not
pleased in their minds. They rose from their seats, blamed him, and left.


At that time Rādha, having risen from meditation in the afternoon, approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the Buddha's feet,
and withdrew to sit at one side. He completely told the Buddha about
the above matter, [saying]: "Blessed One, did I not get into misrepresenting the Blessed One? On being closely interrogated by others who
have come, will I not be censured and fall into an occasion of being
defeated? Did I not speak as I should speak? Did I not speak according to the Dharma, did I not speak the Dharma in accordance with the
Dharma?"


The Buddha said to Rādha: "You spoke truthfully. You did not misrepresent the Tathāgata. [38c] On being closely interrogated by others,
you will not be censured and fall into an occasion of being defeated.
You spoke as you should speak. You spoke according to the Dharma,
speaking the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. Why is that?
Rādha, one goes forth to cultivate the holy life under the Tathāgata for
the sake of abandoning worry, sorrow, vexation, and pain in relation
to bodily form. One goes forth to cultivate the holy life under the Tathāgata for the sake of abandoning worry, sorrow, vexation, and pain
in relation to feeling … perception … formations … consciousness."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 116. [Discourse on Viewing as a Self or as Be- longing to a Self]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha.


10 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


Then a group of heterodox wanderers approached Rādha. Having exchanged polite greetings, they withdrew to sit at one side. They asked
Rādha:


"For what sake have you gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
recluse Gotama?"


Rādha replied: "I have gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
Blessed One for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation,
appeasement, and vanishing of seeing bodily form as a self or belonging to a self, and [for the sake of the eradication … and vanishing] of
the underlying tendency, fetter, and attachment to the I-conceit. [16] [I
have gone forth …] for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of seeing feeling … perception …
formations … consciousness as a self or belonging to a self, and [for
the sake of the eradication … and vanishing] of the underlying tendency, fetter, and attachment to the I-conceit."


Then the heterodox wanderers, hearing this statement, were not
pleased in their minds. They rose from their seats, blamed him, and
left.


The monk Rādha, having risen from meditation in the afternoon, approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the Buddha's feet,
and withdrew to sit at one side. He completely told the Buddha about
the above matter, [saying]: "Blessed One, with what I said, did I not
get into misrepresenting the Blessed One? On being closely interrogated by others, will I not be censured and fall into an occasion of
being defeated? Did I not speak as I should speak? Did I not speak according to the Dharma, did I not speak the Dharma in accordance with
the Dharma?"


The Buddha said to Rādha: "You spoke truthfully. You did not misrepresent the Tathāgata. On being closely interrogated by others, you
will not be censured and fall into an occasion of being defeated. You


16 Adopting a correction in the CBETA edition and Yìnshùn 1983: 480 of 漫 to read
慢, the character found also in the next sentence.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 11


spoke as you should speak. You spoke according to the Dharma,
speaking the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. Why is that?
One goes forth to cultivate the holy life under the Tathāgata for the
sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and
vanishing of viewing bodily form as a self or belonging to a self, and

[for the sake of the eradication … and vanishing] of the underlying
tendency, fetter, and attachment to the I-conceit. [One goes forth …]
for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement,
and vanishing of seeing feeling … perception … formations … consciousness as a self or as belonging to a self, and [for the sake of the
eradication … and vanishing] of the underlying tendency, fetter, and
attachment to the I-conceit."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 117. [Discourse on Being with Influxes and Obstruc- tions]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha.


Then a group of heterodox wanderers approached Rādha. Having exchanged polite greetings, they withdrew to sit at one side. They asked
Rādha:


"For what sake have you gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
recluse Gotama?"


Rādha replied: [39a] "I have gone forth to cultivate the holy life under
the Tathāgata for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation,
appeasement, and vanishing of influxes, obstructions, fever, vexation,
worry, and sadness in relation to bodily form. [I have gone forth …]
for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement,
and vanishing of influxes, obstructions, fever, vexation, worry, and
sadness in relation to feeling … perception … formations … consciousness."


12 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


Then the group of heterodox wanderers, having heard this, were not
pleased in their minds. They rose from their seats, blamed him, and left.


At that time Rādha, having risen from meditation in the afternoon,
approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the Buddha's
feet, and withdrew to sit at one side. He completely told the Buddha
about the above matter, [saying]: "Blessed One, with what I said, did I
not misrepresent the Blessed One? On being closely interrogated by
others, will I not be censured and fall into an occasion of being defeated? Did I not speak as I should speak? Did I not speak according
to the Dharma, did I not speak the Dharma in accordance with the
Dharma?"


The Buddha said to Rādha: "You spoke truthfully. You did not misrepresent the Tathāgata. On being closely interrogated by others, you
will not be censured and fall into an occasion of being defeated. You
spoke as you should speak. You spoke according to the Dharma,
speaking the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. [17] Why is that?
One goes forth to cultivate the holy life under the Tathāgata for the
sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and
vanishing of influxes, obstructions, fever, vexation, worry, and sadness in relation to bodily form. [One goes forth …] for the sake of the
eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of
influxes, obstructions, fever, vexation, worry, and sadness in relation
to feeling … perception … formations … consciousness."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 118. [Discourse on Lust, Hatred, and Delusion]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha.


17 Adopting a variant that adds 不令他人難問詰責墮負處也, 如說說, 如法說, 法次
法說; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 484 note 8.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 13


Then [a group of] heterodox wanderers approached Rādha. Having exchanged polite greetings, they withdrew to sit at one side. They asked
Rādha:


"For what sake have you gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
recluse Gotama?"


Rādha replied: "I have gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
Tathāgata for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of lust, hatred, and delusion in relation to
bodily form. [I have gone forth …] for the sake of the eradication,
fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of lust, hatred,
and delusion in relation to feeling … perception … formations … consciousness."


Then the heterodox wanderers, having heard this statement, were not
pleased in their minds. They rose from their seats, blamed him, and
left.


The monk Rādha, having risen from meditation in the afternoon, approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the Buddha's feet,
and withdrew to sit at one side. He completely told the Buddha about
the above matter, [saying]: "Blessed One, with what I said, did I not
misrepresent the Blessed One? On being closely interrogated by
others, will I not be censured and fall into an occasion of being defeated? Did I not speak as I should speak? Did I not speak according
to the Dharma, did I not speak the Dharma in accordance with the
Dharma?"


The Buddha said to Rādha: "You spoke truthfully. You did not misrepresent the Tathāgata. On being closely interrogated by others, you
will not be censured and fall into an occasion of being defeated. You
spoke as you should speak. You spoke according to the Dharma, [39b]
speaking the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. Why is that?
One goes forth to cultivate the holy life under the Tathāgata for the
sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of lust, hatred, and delusion in relation to bodily form. [One
goes forth …] for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation,


14 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


appeasement, and vanishing of lust, hatred, and delusion in relation to
feeling … perception … formations … consciousness."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 119. [Discourse on Desire, Craving, and Delight]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha.


Then a group of heterodox wanderers approached Rādha. Having exchanged polite greetings, they withdrew to sit at one side. They asked
Rādha:


"For what sake have you gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
recluse Gotama?"


Rādha replied: "I have gone forth to cultivate the holy life under the
Tathāgata for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of desire, craving, and delight in relation to
bodily form. [I have gone forth …] for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of desire, craving,
and delight in relation to feeling … perception … formations … consciousness."


Then the heterodox [wanderers], having heard this statement, were not
pleased in their minds. They rose from their seats, blamed him, and
left.


At that time the monk Rādha, having risen from meditation in the
afternoon, approached the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the
Buddha's feet, and withdrew to sit at one side. He completely told the
Buddha about the above matter, [saying]: "Blessed One, with what I
said, did I not misrepresent the Blessed One? On being closely interrogated by others, will I not be censured and fall into an occasion of
being defeated? Did I not speak as I should speak? Did I not speak
according to the Dharma, did I not speak the Dharma in accordance
with the Dharma?"


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 15


The Buddha said to Rādha: "You spoke truthfully. You did not misrepresent the Tathāgata. On being closely interrogated by others, you
will not be censured and fall into an occasion of being defeated. [18]
You spoke as you should speak. You spoke according to the Dharma,
speaking the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. Why is that?
One goes forth to cultivate the holy life under the Tathāgata for the
sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and
vanishing of desire, craving, and delight in relation to bodily form.

[One goes forth …] for the sake of the eradication, fading away, cessation, appeasement, and vanishing of desire, craving, and delight in
relation to feeling … perception … formations … consciousness."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 120. [First Discourse on Māra] [19]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, [20] at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of
Rādha.


Then the Blessed One said to Rādha: "Whatever bodily form, whether
past, [39c] future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, sublime or repugnant, far or near, it should all be contemplated as being
completely made by Māra. Whatever feeling … perception … for

18 Adopting the variant 責 instead of 嘖, in keeping with the formulation found elsewhere; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 484 note 9.

19 Parallel: [[SN23.11]] at SN III 195,1. Akanuma 1929/1990: 33 suggests [[SN23.1]] as a
parallel, but [[SN23.1]] at SN III 189,18 proceeds from rightly seeing the five
aggregates to a question and answer exchange on the purpose of rightly seeing, an
exchange that is without a counterpart in [[SA120]] This exchange then leads from
disenchantment via dispassion and liberation to Nirvāṇa, of which no further purpose
can be designated, as it is the final goal. Yìnshùn 1983: 490 note 1 suggests [[SN23.12]] as a parallel to [[SA120]] but this discourse seems to be a closer parallel to [[SA121]] as it takes up the topic of being of the nature of Māra, _maradhamma_, instead of
just taking up Māra, which is the topic of [[SN23.11]] and [[SA120]]

20 [[SN23.11]] at SN III 195,1 instead takes place at Sāvatthī.


16 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


mations … consciousness, whether past, future or present, internal or
external, gross or subtle, sublime or repugnant, far or near, it should
all be contemplated as being completely made by Māra." [21]


The Buddha said to Rādha: "Is bodily form permanent or is it impermanent?"


He replied: "It is impermanent, Blessed One."


[The Buddha] asked again: "What is impermanent, is it _dukkha_ ?"


He replied: "It is _dukkha_, Blessed One."


Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this_ .


[The Buddha] asked again: "Rādha, what is impermanent, _dukkha_, of a
nature to change, would a learned noble disciple herein regard such bodily
form as the self, as distinct from the self [in the sense of being owned by
it], as existing [within the self, or the self] as existing [within it]?"


He replied: "No, Blessed One."

Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this_ . [22]


The Buddha said to Rādha: "Because a learned noble disciple does not
view these five aggregates of clinging as a self or as belonging to a
self, he does not cling to anything in the whole world. Because of not
clinging to anything, he is not attached to anything. Because of not
being attached to anything, he personally realizes Nirvāṇa, [knowing]:
'Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has been established,
what had to be done has been done, I myself know that there will be
no receiving of any further existence.'"


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.


21 In [[SN23.11]] at SN III 195,4 the Buddha's exposition comes in reply to a question by
Rādha as to what Māra stands for. The Buddha then just explains that each of the
five aggregates should be seen as Māra.

22 Adopting a variant reading that adds 受想行識亦復如是; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983:
490 note 2. Instead of the standard catechism on the five aggregates given in [[SA120]]
[[SN23.11]] at SN III 195,6 proceeds directly to rightly seeing the five aggregates and
therewith to becoming disenchanted with them and becoming liberated.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 17


# 121. [Discourse on Being of a Mortal Nature] [23]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, [24] at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of
Rādha.


Then the Blessed One said to the monk Rādha: "Whatever bodily form,
whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle,
sublime or repugnant, far or near, it is all completely of a mortal nature. Whatever feeling … perception … formations … consciousness,
whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle,
sublime or repugnant, far or near, it is all completely of a mortal nature." [25 ]


The Buddha said to Rādha: "Is bodily form permanent or is it impermanent?"


He replied: "It is impermanent, Blessed One."


[The Buddha] asked again: "What is impermanent, is it _dukkha_ ?"


He replied: "It is _dukkha_, Blessed One."


[The Buddha asked]: "Is feeling … perception … formations … consciousness permanent or is it impermanent?"


He replied: "It is impermanent, Blessed One."


[The Buddha] asked again: "What is impermanent, is it _dukkha_ ?"


23 Parallels: [[SN23.12]] at SN III 195,8 and [[SN23.24]] at SN III 198,23.

24 [[SN23.12]] at SN III 195,8 instead takes place at Sāvatthī; [[SN23.24]] gives no explicit
indication of the location.

25 In [[SN23.12]] at SN III 195,12 the Buddha's exposition comes in reply to a question by
Rādha as to what being subject to Māra, _māradhamma_, stands for, which could refer
to being of the "nature of Māra" or else of a "mortal nature", given that the term
_māra_ can also just mean "death" (similar to _maraṇa_ ). The Buddha then explains that
each of the five aggregates should be seen as _māradhamma_ . Seeing it in this way
then leads via disenchantment etc. to liberation. In [[SN23.24]] at SN III 198,23 the
Buddha's exposition is not prompted by an inquiry by Rādha. Here the Buddha
instructs Rādha to give up desire and lust for the five aggregates, which are
_māradhamma_ .


18 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


He replied: "It is _dukkha_, Blessed One."


[The Buddha] asked again: "What is impermanent, _dukkha_, of a nature
to change, would a learned noble disciple herein regard it as the self,
as distinct from the self [in the sense of being owned by it], as existing

[within the self, or the self] as existing [within it]?"


He replied: "No, Blessed One."


The Buddha said to Rādha: "If a learned noble disciple examines these
five aggregates of clinging as they really are as not self and not belonging to a self, he does not cling to anything in the whole world. Not
clinging to anything, he is not attached to anything. Because of not
being attached to anything, he personally realizes Nirvāṇa, [knowing]:

[40a] 'Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, I myself know that there
will be no receiving of any further existence.'"


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 122. [Discourse on the Living Being] [26]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula. [27] Then an attendant monk by the name of Rādha said to the
Buddha: "Blessed One, regarding a living being: What is called a
living being?"


The Buddha said to Rādha: "Being defiled by attachment to and entangled with bodily form ― this is called a living being. Being defiled
by attachment to and entangled with feeling … perception … formations … consciousness ― this is called a living being." [28]


26 Parallel: [[SN23.2]] at SN III 189,30.

27 [[SN23.2]] at SN III 189,30 instead takes place at Sāvatthī.

28 [[SN23.2]] at SN III 190,3 defines a living being ( _satta_ ) as being attached ( _satta_ ), fully
attached ( _visatta_ ) through desire, lust, delight, and craving for the five aggregates.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 19


The Buddha said to Rādha: "I say that [craving for] the bodily form
sphere should be broken up, destroyed, made to disappear and extinguished, that [craving for] the feeling … perception … formations …
consciousness sphere should be broken up, destroyed, made to disappear and extinguished. One should eliminate craving and desire for it.
From the eradication of craving comes the eradication of _dukkha_ . I say
that one who eradicates _dukkha_ makes an end of _dukkha_ .


"It is just as if in a village small boys and small girls play by gathering
earth to construct a city with walls and houses. Their minds delight in
it with craving and they are attached to it. As long as their craving for
it is not eradicated, their desire for it is not eradicated, their thinking

[fondly] of it is not eradicated, their thirst for it is not eradicated, their
mind continues to crave for it with delight, protecting it by saying:
'This is my walled city and these are my houses.'


"If their craving for that assemblage of earth is eradicated, their desire
for it is eradicated, their thinking [fondly] of it is eradicated, their
thirst for it is eradicated, they push it over with their hands or kick it
over with their feet so that it becomes scattered.


"In the same way, Rādha, craving for bodily form is to be broken up,
destroyed, made to disappear and extinguished. [Craving for
feeling … perception … formations … consciousness is to be broken
up, destroyed, made to disappear and extinguished]. [29] Because of the
eradication of craving, _dukkha_ is eradicated. I say that because of the
eradication of _dukkha_ one makes an end of _dukkha_ ."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.


On this playful etymology, which relates Skt. _sattva_ to Skt. _sakta_, cf. also Anālayo
2010:19 note 18.

29 My supplementation is guided by the context, since the eradication of craving and
_dukkha_ requires that the recommendation to Rādha covers all five aggregates. These
are in fact explicitly mentioned in the parallel [[SN23.2]] at SN III 190,21.


20 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


# 123. [Discourse on Craving, Delight, and Lust] [30]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula. Then an attendant monk by the name of Rādha approached the
Buddha, paid respect at the Buddha's feet, withdrew to sit at one side,
and said to the Buddha:


"It would be well if the Blessed One would teach me the essentials of
the Dharma in brief. Having heard the Dharma, I shall alone in a quiet
place single-mindedly reflect on it, becoming established in it without
negligence, [so that I attain that] for the sake of which a clansman's
son shaves off beard and hair, wears the dyed robes on his body, goes
forth out of right faith into homelessness to train in the path and with
increased energy cultivates the holy life, sees the Dharma and personally knows and realizes that: 'Birth for me has been eradicated, the
holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, I
myself know that there will be no receiving of any further existence.'"


At that time the Blessed One said to Rādha: "It is well, Rādha, that
you are able to inquire after such a matter in front of the Buddha.
Listen and pay careful attention to what I shall tell you. Rādha, you
should understand identity ( _sakkāya_ ), the arising of identity, the
cessation of identity, and the path to the cessation of identity.


"What is identity? That is, it is the five aggregates of clinging ― [40b]
the bodily form aggregate of clinging … the feeling … the perception … the formations … the consciousness aggregate of clinging.


"What is the arising of identity? That is, it is craving conjoined with
lust and delight for future becoming, delighting with craving here and
there. This is called the arising of identity.


30 Akanuma 1929/1990: 33 identifies [[SN23.9]] at SN III 193,18 and [[SN23.10]] at SN III
194,4 as parallels. Both discourses seems to be too different from [[SA123]] to be reckoned parallels, as they do not begin with an inquiry by Rādha to be taught in brief for
being able to engage in secluded practice, do not take up the topic of _sakkāya_, and do
not report any realization by Rādha.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 21


"What is the cessation of identity? That is, it is the abandoning
without remainder, giving up, vomiting out, eradication, fading away,
appeasing, and vanishing of craving conjoined with lust and delight
for future becoming, delighting with craving here and there. This is
called the cessation of identity.


"What is path to the cessation of identity? That is, it is the eightfold
right path ― right view, right intention, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. This is called the path to the cessation of identity.


"You should understand identity, you should abandon the arising of
identity, you should realize the cessation of identity, and you should
cultivate the path to the cessation of identity.


"Rādha, if a learned noble disciple has understood and abandoned
identity, has understood and abandoned the arising of identity, has
understood and realized the cessation of identity, has understood and
cultivated the path to the cessation of identity, Rādha, [then] he is said
to have abandoned craving, to have become free from craving, to have
stopped the continuity of bondage, to have rightly comprehended
( _abhisameti_ ) conceit, and [to have reached] the unsurpassed transcendence of _dukkha_ ."


Hearing what the Buddha had said, the monk Rādha was delighted and
received it respectfully. He rose from his seat, paid respect, and left.
Having been instructed by the Blessed One in this way, the monk
Rādha alone in a quiet place single-mindedly reflected on it. [He attained that] for the sake of which a clansman's son shaves off beard
and hair, wears the dyed robes, goes forth out of right faith into homelessness to train in the path and with increased energy cultivates the
holy life. He saw the Dharma and personally knew and realized that:
'Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has been established,
what had to be done has been done, I myself know that there will be
no receiving of any further existence.' He became an arahant with the
mind being well liberated.


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.


22 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


# 124. [Second Discourse on Māra] [31]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha.

At that time the Blessed One said to the monk Rādha: "Monks, [32]
whatever bodily form, whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, sublime or repugnant, far or near, it should all
be contemplated as being completely [on the side of] Māra. Whatever
feeling … perception … formations … consciousness, whether past,
future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, sublime or repugnant, far or near, it should all be contemplated as being completely

[on the side of] Māra.


"Rādha, what do you think, is bodily form permanent or is it impermanent?"


He replied: "It is impermanent, Blessed One."


[The Buddha asked again]: "What is impermanent, is it _dukkha_ ?"


He replied: "It is _dukkha_, Blessed One."


[The Buddha asked again]: "What is impermanent, _dukkha_, of a nature
to change, would a learned noble disciple herein regard it as the self?"


He replied: "No, Blessed One."


Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this_ .

[40c]


"Therefore, Rādha, a learned noble disciple gives rise to disenchantment with bodily form, gives rise to disenchantment with feeling …
perception … formations … consciousness. Because of being disenchanted, he does not delight in it. Because of not delighting in it, he
becomes liberated. Being liberated he knows and sees: 'Birth for me
has been eradicated, the holy life has been established, what had to be


31 Parallel: [[SN23.11]] at SN III 195,1 (cf. the comments above in notes 19 to 22).

32 The original clearly uses plural here, implying that other monks were also present.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 23


done has been done, I myself know that there will be no receiving of
any further existence.'"


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

# 125. [Discourse on What is Made by Māra] [33]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha.


Then the Blessed One said to the monk Rādha: "Whatever bodily form,
whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle,
sublime or repugnant, far or near, it is all completely made by Māra.
Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this_ .


The Buddha said to Rādha: "What do you think, is bodily form permanent or is it impermanent?"


He replied: "It is impermanent, Blessed One."


[The Buddha] asked again: "What is impermanent, is it _dukkha_ ?"


He replied: "It is _dukkha_, Blessed One."


[The Buddha] asked again: "Is feeling … perception … formations …
consciousness permanent or is it impermanent?"


He replied: "It is impermanent, Blessed One."


[The Buddha] asked again: "What is impermanent, is it _dukkha_ ?"


He replied: "It is _dukkha_, Blessed One."


The Buddha said to Rādha: "What is impermanent, _dukkha_, of a nature
to change, would a learned noble disciple herein regard it as the self,
as distinct from the self [in the sense of being owned by it], as existing

[within the self, or the self] as existing [within it]?"


33 Parallels: [[SN23.12]] at SN III 195,8 and [[SN23.24]] at SN III 198,23; cf. above notes 23
to 25.


24 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


He replied: "No, Blessed One."


[The Buddha said]: "Therefore, Rādha, a learned noble disciple gives
rise to disenchantment with bodily form. Because of being disenchanted, he does not delight in it. He gives rise to disenchantment with
feeling … perception … formations … consciousness. Because of
being disenchanted, he does not delight in it. [34] Because of not delighting in it, he becomes liberated. Being liberated he knows and sees:
'Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has been established,
what had to be done has been done, I myself know that there will be
no receiving of any further existence.'"


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.

A third discourse is also like this, with the difference: [35] The Buddha
said to Rādha: "A learned noble disciples examines these five aggregates of clinging as not self and not belonging to a self. [36] Having examined them, he does not cling to anything in the whole world. Because of not clinging, he is not attached. Because of not being attached,
he personally realizes Nirvāṇa, [knowing]: 'Birth for me has been
eradicated, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has
been done, I myself know that there will be no receiving of any further
existence."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.


34 Adopting a variant that adds 於受想行識生厭, 厭故不樂; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983:
491 note 7.

35 [[SN23.17]] at SN III 196,18 or [[SN23.29]] at SN III 199,5 also take up the not-self nature
of the five aggregates in an instruction given to Rādha, although they differ in so far
as [[SN23.17]] sets out with a question by Rādha about the significance of not-self,
whereas in [[SN23.29]] Rādha asks for an instruction in brief so that he might dwell in
seclusion.

36 Adopting a variant without 陰陰; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 491 note 9.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 25


# 126. [Discourse on Being of a Mortal Nature] [37]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha.


Then the Blessed One said to Rādha: [41a] "Whatever bodily form,
whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle,
sublime or repugnant, far or near, it should all be contemplated as
being completely of a mortal nature. Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this_ .


_The rest should be recited as before._

# 127. [First Discourse on Being of the Nature to be Abandoned] [38]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, [39] at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of
Rādha.


Then the Blessed One said to Rādha: "Whatever bodily form, whether
past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, sublime or
repugnant, far or near, it should all be contemplated as being completely of the nature to be abandoned. Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this_ . [40]


37 Parallels: [[SN23.12]] at SN III 195,8 or [[SN23.24]] at SN III 198,23; see above notes 23
to 25 and 33.

38 Parallel: [[SN23.19]] at SN III 197,4.

39 [[SN23.19]] at SN III 197,4 instead takes place at Sāvatthī.

40 In [[SN23.19]] at SN III 197,8 the Buddha's exposition comes in reply to a question by
Rādha as to what is of a nature to pass away ( _khaya_ ). The Buddha then explains that
each of the five aggregates is of a nature to pass away, without explicitly indicating
that this applies to any possible instance of an aggregate in the way this is done in
[[SA127]] (although the same can safely be assumed to be implicit).


26 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


"A learned noble disciple who contemplates in this way gives rise to
disenchantment with bodily form, gives rise to disenchantment with
feeling … perception … formations … consciousness. Because of
being disenchanted, he does not delight in it. Because of not delighting in it, he becomes liberated. Being liberated he himself knows and
sees: 'Birth for me has been eradicated, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, I myself know that there
will be no receiving of any further existence.'"


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.


Just as "examining it as being of the nature to be abandoned", in the
same way one "examines it as being of the nature to cease", "examines
it as being of the nature to be given up", "examines it as being of an
impermanent nature", "examines it as being of the nature of being
_dukkha_ ", "examines it as being of an empty nature", "examines it as
being of a not-self nature", "examines it as being of the nature of
being impermanent, _dukkha_, empty, and not self", "examines it as
being of the nature of a disease", "examines it as being of the nature of
a carbuncle", "examines it as being of the nature of a thorn", "examines it as being of the nature of being cut off", "examines it as being of
the nature of [providing] the foundation for being cut off", "examines
it as being of the nature of a disease, a carbuncle, a thorn, being cut off,
and the foundation for being cut off." In this way the discourses _are_
_all as said_ _above_ .

# 128. [Second Discourse on Being of the Nature to be Abandoned] [41]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha.


41 Parallel: [[SN23.31]] at SN III 199,7.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 27


Then the Blessed One said to Rādha: "Whatever bodily form, whether
past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, sublime or
repugnant, far or near, it should all be contemplated as being completely of the nature to be abandoned. Having examined it, desire and
lust for bodily form are abandoned. Desire and lust having been abandoned, [42] I say that the mind is well liberated. Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this_ ."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully.


In this way fourteen discourses _are also as said_ _above_ .

# 129. [Third Discourse on Being of the Nature to be Abandoned] [43]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Mount Makula, at that time being with an attendant monk by the name of Rādha.

[41b]


Then the Blessed One said to Rādha: "Whatever bodily form, whether
past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, sublime or
repugnant, far or near, it should all be contemplated as being completely of the nature to be abandoned. Having examined it as of the
nature to be abandoned, desire and lust for bodily form are abandoned.
Desire and lust having been abandoned, [44] I say that the mind is well
liberated. Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is_
_also like this_ ."


42 Adopting the variant 欲 instead of 色; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 491 note 12.

43 Parallel: [[SN23.43]] at SN III 201,5, where the Buddha tells Rādha that he should give
up desire for what is of nature to pass away, _khayadhamma_, namely the five aggregates.

44 Adopting a variant that adds 欲貪斷已; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 493 note 2.


28 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monk Rādha was delighted and received it respectfully. [45]

# [CONNECTED DISCOURSES ON VIEWS] 130. [Discourse on Seeking Out the Great Teacher]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: "One who wishes to
abandon the five aggregates of clinging should seek out the Great
Teacher. [46] What are the five? That is, they are the bodily form aggregate of clinging … the feeling … the perception … the formations … the consciousness aggregate of clinging. Wishing to
abandon these five aggregates of clinging, one should seek out the
Great Teacher."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


_Just as_ "one should abandon", _in the same way_ "one should
understand", "one should vomit out", "one should appease", "one
should give up" _is_ _also like this_ .


_Just as_ seeking out "the great teacher", _in the same way_ [seeking out]
"the superior teacher", "the teacher of the proper sequence", "the
instructor", "the superior instructor", "the instructor of the proper
sequence", "the one who has penetrated", "the one who has widely
penetrated", "the one who has fully penetrated", "the one who guides",
"the one who widely guides", "the one who ultimately guides", "the
one who explains", "the one who widely explains", "the one who
explains in proper sequence", "the one who is upright", "the one who


45 Here the section with connected sayings to Rādha comes to a close.

46 The great teacher is of course the Tathāgata; cf. T 1579 at T XXX 760a17 and
Yìnshùn 1983: 493 note 4.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 29


is a companion", "the one who truly is a friend", "the one who is [as if
he were one's] relative", "the one with empathy", "the compassionate
one", "the guide to meaning", "the one who comforts", "the guide to
happiness", "the guide to experience", "the guide to comfort", "the one
who wishes [one's welfare]", "the energetic one", "the expedient one",
"the diligent one", "the brave one", "the firm one", "the strong one",
"the capable one", "the expert", "the one whose mind does not
regress", "the stable one", "the one who constantly practices", "the
never negligent one", "the harmonious one", "the considerate one",
"the recollected one", "the awakened one", "the understanding one",
"the knowing one", "the wise one", "the receptive one", "the attentive
one", "the one who practices the holy life", "the one established in
mindfulness", "the one with right effort", "the one with the bases of
supernormal power", "the one with the faculties", [47] "the one with the
powers", "the one with the awakening factors", "the one with the
factors of the path", "the tranquilized one", "the insightful one", "the
one with mindfulness of the body", "the one with right recollection",
_is_ _also like this_ .

# 131. [Discourse on Becoming Habituated] [48]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: "If a recluse or Brahmin becomes habituated to bodily form, [49] he follows Māra's power,
falls into Māra's hand, follows Māra's wishes, is bound by Māra, and
is not free from Māra's fetters. [50] Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this_ .


47 Cf. SHT IV 30d V8, Sander and Waldschmidt 1980: 83: _[in]dr(i)[y](āṇi)_ .

48 Parallel: SHT IV 30d, Sander and Waldschmidt 1980: 83.

49 SHT IV 30d V9, Sander and Waldschmidt 1980: 83: _c-chramaṇā (vā brā)hmaṇā vā rūpe._

50 SHT IV 30d V10, Sander and Waldschmidt 1980: 83: _māraba(ndhanebya)[ḥ] apari_          _muktā_, and SHT IV 30d R1: _[ā]gatā yathā[k]._


30 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


"If a recluse or Brahmin does not become habituated to bodily form,
then in this way the recluse or Brahmin does not follow Māra's power,

[41c] does not fall into Māra's hand, does not follow Māra's wishes, is
free from being bound by Māra, and is free from Māra's fetters. [51]
Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like_
_this_ ." [52]


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


_In the same way_ "one who becomes habituated to drawing close to it",
"one who becomes habituated to being attached to it", "one who is
gratified by it", "one who is resolved on and attached to it", "one who
rests with it", "one who has an underlying tendency for it", "one who
approaches it", "one who opts for it", [53] "one who does not give it up",
"one who does not vomit it out". In this way a recluse or Brahmin
follows Māra's power … _as said above._

# 132. [Discourse on Not Becoming Habituated]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: "If a recluse or Brahmin does not become habituated to bodily form, [54] then he does not
follow Māra's power, does not go into Māra's hand, does not follow
Māra's wishes, is not bound by Māra's bondage, and is free from


51 SHT IV 30d R2, Sander and Waldschmidt 1980: 83: _n-āva[ś](agatā) mārasya na_
_vaśa(g)_, and SHT IV 30d R4: _(pa)rimuktā (māra)[p]ā[ś]e[bh](ya)[ḥ āl]ī._

52 Adopting a variant that adds 受想行識亦復如是; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 494 note 5.
SHT IV 30d R3, Sander and Waldschmidt 1980: 83: _saṃskā … [vi]jñāne_
_n-ālīyaṃ(te)._

53 Adopting the variant 選 instead of 撰; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 494 note 6.

54 My translation follows the suggestion by Yìnshùn 1983: 494 note 7 to delete 近,
which is not found in the phrasing used for the other aggregates.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 31


Māra's fetters. Not becoming habituated to feeling … perception …
formations … consciousness _is also like this_ .


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


_Up to_ "vomiting out bodily form" _is also like this._

# 133. [Discourse on What is the Cause] [55]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: "The existence of
what is the cause, by clinging to what, [56] by being fettered and attached to what, by seeing what as the self, [57] are living beings hindered
by ignorance, led by the fetter of craving, running around for a long
time, revolving in the cycle of births and deaths, continuously transmigrating through births and deaths, without understanding its
origin?" [58]


The monks said to the Buddha: "The Blessed One is the root of the
Dharma, the eye of the Dharma, the foundation of the Dharma. It
would be well if the Blessed One could explain the meaning of this


55 Parallels: a discourse quotation in the _Abhidharmakośabhāṣya_, Pradhan 1967: 356,15
(& 357,5), identified as a quote from the present discourse in Pāsādika 1989: 106
(§422), and in the _Abhidharmakośavyākhyā_, Wogihara 1936: 554,6. Akanuma
1929/1990: 35 identifies [[SN24.2]] as a parallel to [[SA133]] but this discourse seems to
be a closer parallel to [[SA134]] cf. below note 63. Since [[SA134]] abbreviates most of
its exposition, for the sake of clarity I will note some of the differences between the
two _Saṃyukta-āgama_ discourses and [[SN24.2]] already here in the notes to [[SA133]]

56 [[SA133]] at T II 41c15 actually reads 何所起, "by the arising of what?", where my
translation here and below assumes that this is another instance of confounding
_utpāda_ with _upāda_, as evident in the rendering of _anupādāya_ as 不起 elsewhere in
the collection; cf. Anālayo 2014: 8 note 17.

57 In [[SN24.2]] at SN III 203,31 the view is: "this is mine, this I am, this is my self",
which here and below in the exposition is not followed by a reference to living
beings continuing in _saṃsāra_ .

58 Adopting the variant 知 instead of 去; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 501 note 3.


32 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


fully to the monks, out of compassion. Having heard it, the monks will
uphold and receive it respectfully."


The Buddha said to the monks: "Listen and pay careful attention to
what I shall tell you. Monks, the existence of bodily form is the cause,
it is by clinging to the matter of bodily form, by being fettered and
attached to bodily form, by seeing bodily form as a self, that living
beings are hindered by ignorance, led by the fetter of craving, running
around for a long time, revolving in the cycle of births and deaths,
continuously transmigrating through births and deaths. Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this._


"Monks, is bodily form permanent or is it impermanent?"


They replied: "It is impermanent, Blessed One."


[The Buddha] asked again: "What is impermanent, is it _dukkha_ ?"


They replied: "It is _dukkha_, Blessed One."


[The Buddha said:] "In this way, monks, what is impermanent is _duk_ _kha_ . This _dukkha_ is the cause, it is by clinging to this matter, by being
fettered and attached to it, by seeing it as the self, that living beings
are hindered by ignorance, led by the fetter of craving, running around
for a long time, revolving in the cycle of births and deaths, continuously transmigrating through births and deaths. Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this._


"Therefore, monks, whatever bodily form, whether past, [42a] future
or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, sublime or repugnant,
far or near, all that is not self, not distinct from the self [in the sense of
being owned by it], does not exist [within the self, nor does a self] exist [within it]. This is called right wisdom. Feeling … perception …
formations … consciousness _is also like this._


"In this way what is seen, heard, experienced, cognized, searched for,
remembered, [59] followed with [directed] awareness ( _vitakka_ ) and
followed with [sustained] contemplation ( _vicāra_ ), all that is not self,


59 Adopting a variant without 隨.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 33


not distinct from the self [in the sense of being owned by it], does not
exist [within the self, nor does a self] exist [within it]. [60] This is called
right wisdom.


"If there is the view proclaiming that a self exists and a world exists,
and that this existing world is permanent, lasting, and of an unchanging nature ― all that is not self, not distinct from the self [in the sense
of being owned by it], does not exist [within the self, nor does a self]
exist [within it]. This is called right wisdom.


"If again there is the view that this self does not exist, that nothing belongs to this self, that the self will not be in the future and nothing belonging to the self will be in the future ― all that is not self, not distinct from the self [in the sense of being owned by it], does not exist

[within the self, nor does a self] exist [within it]. This is called right
wisdom. [61]


"Suppose a learned noble disciple examines these six standpoints for
views as not self and not belonging to a self. One who contemplates in
this way abandons doubt in relation to the Buddha, abandons doubt in
relation to the Dharma … in relation to the Community. Monks, this is
called a learned noble disciple who is no longer capable of undertaking a bodily, verbal or mental deed that would lead to the three evil
destinies. Even if he is negligent, the noble disciple is certain to proceed to awakening, within seven existences of going and coming
among _deva_ s and humans he will make an end of _dukkha_ ." [62 ]


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


60 [[SN24.2]] at SN III 204,17 repeats the whole catechism, beginning with impermanence,
for what is seen, heard, experienced, cognized, reached, searched after, and followed
after.

61 These two views have no counterpart in [[SN24.2]]

62 Pradhan 1967: 356,15 and 357,5: _saptakṛtvo devāśca manuṣyāśce ti_ … _duḥkhasyāntaṃ_
_karotīti_ ; Wogihara 1936: 554,6: _niyataṃ saṃbodhi-parāyaṇaḥ saptakṛtvaḥ-paramaḥ_
_saptakṛtvo devāṃś ca manuṣyāṃś ca saṃdhāvya saṃsṛtya duḥkhasyāṃtaṃ karotîti._


34 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


# 134. [First Discourse on Abandoning Doubt] [63]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks … _as said above, with_
_the difference_ : "A learned noble disciple examines these six standpoints for views as not self and not belonging to a self. One who contemplates in this way abandons doubt in relation to _dukkha_, in relation
to its arising, in relation to its cessation, and in relation to the path. [64]
Monks, this is called a learned noble disciple who is no longer capable
of undertaking a bodily, verbal or mental deed that leads to the three
evil destinies, [65] … _to be spoken in full up to_ … makes an end of _dukkha_ ."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 135. [Second Discourse on Abandoning Doubt]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks … _as fully said above,_
_with the difference_ : "Suppose a learned noble disciple examines these
six standpoints for views as not self and not belonging to a self. One
who contemplates in this way abandons doubt in relation to the Bud

63 Parallel: [[SN24.2]] at SN III 203,30; cf. above note 55.

64 [[SN24.2]] at SN III 204,27 indicates that when the noble disciple has abandoned doubt
in relation to these six standpoints and doubt about _dukkha_, its arising, its cessation,
and the way leading to its cessation, he is called a stream-enterer. Due to taking up
doubt in relation to the four noble truths instead of doubt in relation to the Buddha,
the Dharma, and the Community, [[SN24.2]] is a closer parallel to [[SA134]] than to [[SA133]]

65 [[SN24.2]] does not explicitly mention the inability of such a stream-enterer to undertake deeds that ripen in an evil destiny, nor does it mention that he has seven existences at most, although both can safely be assumed to be implicit in its presentation.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 35


dha, in relation to the Dharma, in relation to the Community, and
abandons doubt in relation to _dukkha_, in relation to its arising, in relation to its cessation, and in relation to the path … _to be spoken in full_
_up to_ … makes an end of _dukkha_ ."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully. [42b]

# 136. [Discourse on What Matter is the Cause] [66]


Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in
Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park.


At that time the Blessed One said to the monks: "What matter is the
cause, by clinging to what, by being fettered and attached to what, by
seeing what as a self, monks, are living beings hindered by ignorance,
led by the fetter of craving, running around for a long time, revolving
in the cycle of births and deaths, continuously transmigrating through
births and deaths, without understanding its origin?" [67]


The monks said to the Buddha: "The Blessed One is the root of the
Dharma, the eye of the Dharma, the foundation of the Dharma. It
would be well if the Blessed One could explain the meaning of this
fully, out of compassion. Having heard it, the monks will uphold and
receive it respectfully."


The Buddha said to the monks: "Listen and pay careful attention to
what I shall tell you. Monks, bodily form is the cause, it is by clinging
to the matter of bodily form, by being fettered and attached to bodily
form, by seeing bodily form as the self, that living beings are hindered
by ignorance, led by the fetter of craving, running around for a long
time, revolving in the cycle of births and deaths, continuously trans

66 Parallels: the same discourse quotation as mentioned above in note 55 and a discourse quotation in the _Abhidharmakośabhāṣya_, Pradhan 1967: 471,23, identified as a
quote from the present discourse in Pāsādika 1989: 131 (§529).

67 Pradhan 1967: 471,23: _avidyānivaraṇānāṃ sattvānāṃ saṃdhāvatāṃ saṃsaratām [[ITI36]] 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


migrating through births and deaths. Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this._


"Monks, is bodily form permanent or is it impermanent?"


They replied: "It is impermanent, Blessed One."


[The Buddha] asked again: "What is impermanent, is it _dukkha_ ?"


They replied: "It is _dukkha_, Blessed One."


[The Buddha said:] "In this way, monks, what is impermanent is _duk_ _kha_ . This _dukkha_ is the cause, it is by clinging to this matter, by being
fettered and attached to it, by seeing it as the self, that living beings
are hindered by ignorance, led by the fetter of craving, running around
for a long time, revolving in the cycle of births and deaths, continuously transmigrating through births and deaths. Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness _is also like this._


"Therefore, monks, whatever bodily form, whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, sublime or repugnant, far or
near, it is all not self, not distinct from the self [in the sense of being
owned by it], does not exist [within the self, nor does a self] exist

[within it]. One who contemplates it in this way is called one with
right wisdom. Feeling … perception … formations … consciousness
_is also like this._


"In this way what is seen, heard, experienced, cognized, searched for,
remembered, followed with [directed] awareness, and followed with

[sustained] contemplation, all that is not self, not distinct from the self

[in the sense of being owned by it], does not exist [within the self, nor
does a self] exist [within it]. This is called right wisdom.


"If there is the view proclaiming that a self exists and a world exists,
and that the existence of this world is permanent, lasting, and unchanging ― all that is not self, not distinct from the self [in the sense
of being owned by it], does not exist [within the self, nor does a self]
exist [within it]. This is called right wisdom.


"If again there is the view that this self does not exist, that nothing belongs to this self, that the self will not be in the future and nothing belonging to the self will be in the future ― all that is not self, not dis

On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 37


tinct from the self [in the sense of being owned by it], does not exist

[within the self, nor does a self] exist [within it]. This is called right
wisdom.


"Suppose a learned noble disciple examines these six standpoints for
views as not self and not belonging to a self. One who contemplates in
this way abandons doubt in relation to the Buddha, abandons doubt in
relation to the Dharma … in relation to the Community. [42c] Monks,
these are called those who are no longer capable of undertaking a
bodily, verbal or mental deed that leads to the three evil destinies.
Even if they are negligent, the noble disciples are all certain to proceed to awakening, [68] within seven existences of going and coming
among _deva_ s and humans they will make an end of _dukkha_ ."


When the Buddha had spoken this discourse, hearing what the Buddha
had said the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

# 137. [Third Discourse on Abandoning Doubt]


_A second discourse is also like this, with the difference_ : "He abandons
doubt in relation to _dukkha_, in relation to its arising, in relation to its
cessation, and in relation to the path."

# 138. [Fourth Discourse on Abandoning Doubt]


_A third discourse is also like this, with the difference_ : "He abandons
doubt in relation to the Buddha, in relation to the Dharma, in relation
to the Community, and he abandons doubt in relation to _dukkha_, in
relation to its arising, in relation to its cessation, and in relation to the
path."


68 Adopting the variant 決定 instead of 不從; cf. also Yìnshùn 1983: 501 note 5.


38 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


Abbreviations


Bv-a _Buddhavaṃsa-aṭṭhakathā_


SĀ _Saṃyukta-āgama_


SN _Saṃyutta-nikāya_


T Taishō edition, CBETA



On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 39


References


Akanuma, Chizen 1929/1990: _The Comparative Catalogue of Chinese_
_Āgamas & Pāli Nikāyas_, Delhi: Sri Satguru.


Anālayo 2010: _The Genesis of the Bodhisattva Ideal_, Hamburg: Hamburg
University Press.


——— 2013: "On the Five Aggregates (3) – A Translation of Saṃyukta-āgama Discourses 59 to 87", _Dharma Drum Journal of Buddhist_
_Studies_, 13: 1–65.


——— 2014: "On the Five Aggregates (4) – A Translation of Saṃyukta-āgama Discourses 33 to 58", _Dharma Drum Journal of Buddhist_
_Studies_, 14: 1–71.


Bigandet, P. 1858/1914: _The Life or Legend of Gaudama, The Buddha of the_
_Burmese_, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.


Bucknell, Roderick [[SN2006]] "Samyukta-āgama", in _Encyclopaedia of Bud_       _dhism_, W.G. Weeraratne (ed.), 7.4: 684–687, Sri Lanka: Department
of Buddhist Affairs.


Choong, Mun-keat 2000: _The Fundamental Teachings of Early Buddhism, A_
_Comparative Study Based on the Sūtrāṅga Portion of the Pāli Saṃ_           _yutta-Nikāya and the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama_, Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz.


Chung, Jin-il 2008: _A Survey of the Sanskrit Fragments Corresponding to the_
_Chinese Saṃyuktāgama_, Tokyo: Sankibo.


Malalasekera, G.P. 1938/1998 (vol. 2): _Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names_,
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.


Mochizuki, Shinko 1940: "The Places of Varṣāvasāna during Forty-five Years
of the Buddha's Career after His Enlightenment", _Studies on Bud_           _dhism in Japan_, 2: 29–44.


Pāsādika, Bhikkhu 1989: _Kanonische Zitate im Abhidharmakośabhāṣya des_
_Vasubandhu_, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.


Pradhan, Pralhad 1967: _Abhidharmakośabhāṣya_, Patna: K.P. Jayaswal Research Institute.


Rhys Davids, T.W. 1877/1911: _Buddhism, Being a Sketch of the Life and_
_Teachings of Gautama, the Buddha_, London: Society for Promiting
Christian Knowledge.


40 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


Sander, Lore and Waldschmidt, Ernst 1980: _Sanskrithandschriften aus den_
_Turfanfunden, Teil IV_, Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner.


Wogihara, Unrai 1936: _Sphuṭārthā Abhidharmakośavyākhyā by Yaśomitra,_
_Part II_, Tokyo: The Publishing Association of Abhidharmakośavyākhyā.


Yìnshùn 釋印順 1983 (vol. 3): 《雜阿含經論會編》, Tapei: 正聞出版社.


On Rādha and Views－A Translation of
_Saṃyukta-āgama_ Discourses 111 to 138 (Fascicle 6) 41


羅陀與見 ── 漢譯《雜阿含經》（卷六）111 至 138
經英文譯注


無著比丘


法鼓文理學院研究員


摘要：


本文為漢譯《雜阿含經》第六卷經號 111 至 138 之英文譯註。


關鍵詞：


雜阿含經、羅陀、見


42 法鼓佛學學報第 17 期（2015）


